1::30::1::Thus spoke the two princes to Viswamitra. They were conscious of place and time to speak and capable of conquering enemies. 
1::30::2::O adorable Brahmarshi, we want to know around what time the rakshasas will make their appearance so that the sacrifice can be protected. Let  not that moment pass.
1::30::3::The sages (of the asrama) were very pleased. They extolled the princes of Kakustha dynasty, who were eager to fight the rakshasas.
1::30::4::O sons of Raghu's lineage protect the sacrifice for six nights from today. With the ceremoney initiated, the sage would  observe silence said the inmates.
1::30::5::At these words of the sages the illustrious princes got ready to protect the tapovana for six days and six nights without sleep. 
1::30::6::The two mighty, heroic archers (Rama and Lakshmana), destroyers of enemies attended upon the sacrifice in order to protect sage Viswamitra. 
1::30::7:: Time passed. When the sixth day arrived Rama cautioned Lakshmana to be vigilant.
1::30::8::While he was fracing up for a fight, the fire on the sacrificial altar with the officiating priests and spiritual guides suddenly brightened.
1::30::9:: The altar with Viswamitra and the officiating priests, kusa grass, ladles and square vessels, bundles of sticks and  flowers, (used in the sacrificfial fire) got brightened up.
1::30::10::While the sacrifice was being performed in accordance with mantras, a great sound causing fear emerged from the sky. 
1::30::11:: Like the clouds in the rainy season, the two rakshasas (Maricha and Subahu), covering the sky through their power of illusion, came running (to the sacrificial place). 
1::30::12::Maricha and Subahu of fearful appearance arrived with their followers and rained streams of blood (on the sacrificial altar).
1::30::13::Flames rose on the sacrificial altar drenched by the stream of blood. Immediately Rama rushed forward and beheld them in the sky.
1::30::14::Having seen them (Maricha and Subahu) suddenly advancing the lotuseyed Rama gazed at Lakshmana and said:
1::30::15::O Lakshmana, behold, by manavaastra I shall chase, like clouds scattered by winds those wicked rakshasas who eat human flesh.
1::30::16::The inflamed Rama hurled the highly powerful and effulgent Manavaastra on the chest of Maricha.
1::30::17::Smitten by that powerful Manavaastra, Maricha was thrown to a full distance of hundred yojanas into the surging high seas. 
1::30::18::Having seen Maricha beaten by the power of that coolarrowed astra, thrown to a distance, reeling and lying unconscious, Rama spoke to Lakshmana: 
1::30::19::O Lakshmana behold this Manavaastra associated with righteousness employing a cool arrow, which carries him away by making him unconscious and yet not taking his life.
1::30::20::I shall slay these merciless, wicked doors of sinful acts destroyers of sacrifices and blood rakshasas.
1::30::21::Then Rama took hold of the celestial, marvellous Agneya weapon and hurled it into the chest of Subahu. Struck, Subahuhe fell down on the ground. 
1::30::22::Illustrious and highly generous Rama killed the  remaining rakshasas  with the Vayavya weapon to the delight of the ascetics.
1::30::23::Having killed the rakshasas, obstructors of sacrifices, Rama was worshipped by the hermits like Indra was honoured in the past when he was victorious.
1::30::24::Thereafter, when the sacrifice was completed, maharshi Viswamitra beholding all the directions  bereft of evils, said to Rama:
1::30::25::O mightyarmed Rama I am fulfilled. Your father's commands have been executed. O Illustrious one, Siddhaashrama has proved true to its name.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे त्रिंशस्सर्ग:।।02Thus ends the thirtieth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
