1::73::1::The day the king (Dasaratha) made a gift of the best (available) cows the heroic Yudhajit arrived. 
1::73::2::Yudhajit, son of king Kekaya, Bharata's own maternal uncle met the king (Dasaratha) and enquiring about his wellbeing said: 
1::73::3::My father, king of Kekaya affectionately enquires about your welfare. And they whose welfare you seek  are hale and healthy.
1::73::4::The king of Kekaya, O Indra among kings, O Joy of the Raghus, desires to see my  sisters's son and on that account I went to Ayodhya.
1::73::5::O King having heard in Ayodhya that you have arrived in Mithila along with your sons for their marriage I came here speedily with a desire to see my sister's son . 
1::73::6::King Dasaratha, then accorded a warm welcome to the honoured guest.  
1::73::7::With the night spent with his virtuous sons, he who knew his duties got up at dawn and performed his daily devotionas and reached the sacrificial place following the  rishis.   
1::73::8:: With the necessary auspicious rites preparatory to marriage performed at an auspicious moment, Vijaya, and keeping Vasishta and other maharshis in the forefront,  Rama accompanied by his brothers adorned with ornaments of every kind came into his  father's presence.
1::73::9::Adorable Vasishta approached king Janaka and said, O King, of Videha king Dasaratha, the best of men with his sons having performed the auspicious rites preparatory to marriage is awaiting the bestower of the brides.
1::73::10::The giver and the receiver, indeed, attain all ends. Fulfil  your own duty by performing the auspicious marriage.
1::73::11::Thus addressed by the great self Vasishta, Janaka, the exceedingly generous, highly lustrous, eminent in ethics replied.
1::73::12::Did any guard prevent you? Whose command are you waiting for? Why do you hesitate to enter into your own house? This kingdom is like your kingdom.
1::73::13:: O Best of ascetics my daughters have performed all the rites relating to marriage. They (now) stand at the foot of the altar shining like the bright flames of fire. 
1::73::14::Ready at the altar, I have been awaiting you, O King Without hindrance proceed Why delay?.
1::73::15::At the words of Janaka, Dasaratha brought his sons along with the hosts of ascetics and entered the marriage pavilion. 
1::73::16::Thereafter the king of the Videhas to Vasishta, O Adherent of righteousness, O Lord O Maharshi perform with the rishis the marriage ceremony of Rama who causes delight to the three worlds.   
1::73::17::Venerable and renowned ascetic Vasishta said Be it so.And with Viswamitra and virtuous Satananda in the forefront, an altar was duly improvised in the centre of the sacrificial pavilion. He adorned the altar on all sides  with fragrant flowers, golden ladles, waterpots with holes filled with sprouts, earthen vessels with sprouts, holders of burning fragrant incense conchshaped vessels, sacrificial ladles, bowls filled with with water for arghya and other purposes, vessels with roasted paddy and grains of rice.
1::73::18::Brilliant and worshipful rishi Vasishta chanted, mantras according to tradition, put the darbha grass of equal proportions around the altar, placed the fire on the altar, recited the mantras from the scriptures and offered oblations into the flame.
1::73::19::Thereafter king Janaka brought Sita adorned with various ornaments and placed her in the presence of Agni in front of Rama, the enhancer of the joy of Kausalya. And said:
1::73::20::This my daughter Sita will be your partner in performing her rightful duty. Accept her. Farewell. Take her hand into your own.
1::73::21::By being a devoted wife this highly fortunate Sita would always follow you like a shadow. Thus spoken, he sprinkled the water sanctified with mantras (on them).
1::73::22::Then gods and sages exclaimed: 'well, well'. Celestial kettledrums were sounded and there was a steady rain of flowers. 
1::73::23::Then king Janaka sprinkled on Sita waters sanctified by mantras, and immersed in delight said:
1::73::24::Lakshmana come and accept my daughter. Urmila ready to be bestowed upon you by me. Take her hand. Let there be no delay.
1::73::25::Janaka, having spoken thus to Lakshmana addressed Bharata: O Descendant of the Raghus hold Mandavi's hand in your own.  
1::73::26::The righteous king Janaka, said again: O Mightyarmed Satrughna take the hands of Srutakirti.
1::73::27::O Descendants of Kakustha (Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna) you all are gentle. You possess sound character. You are true to your vows. Live with your wives. Let there be no delay. 
1::73::28::At the words of Janaka the four princes took the hands of the four sisters with their own with the consent of Vasishta .  
1::73::29::The great, noble princes of the race of Raghu, accompanied by their wives circumambulated the altar of the sacred fire. King Janaka and the sages in obedience to the directions of Vasishta and in accordance with the sastras conducted the matrimonial.
1::73::30:: While the descendants of Kakustha (Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna) held the elegant hands (of Sita, Urmila, Mandavi, and Srutakirti) there was a heavy rain of bright flowers from the sky.
1::73::31::While the bridal ceremony of the foremost of Raghus was on, the apsaras danced to the tune of songs and instrumental music. Sounds of celestial kettledrums were heard. Gandharvas sang in mellifluous melody. It was an unearthly sight.
1::73::32::While the celebration resounded witht he windinstruments the mighty brothers went round the fire three times with their consorts and tied their nuptial knot.
1::73::33::Thereafter the descendants of Raghu along with their wives departed for their tents. The king (Dasaratha) also accompanied them with hosts of rishis and relatives. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे त्रिसप्ततितमस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the seventythird sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
