1::45::1::On hearing the words of Viswamitra, Rama along with Lakshmana, filled with astonishment said to him:
1::45::2::O Knower of the Brahman this story narrated by you relating to the descent of the sacred Ganga and the fullness of the ocean  (due to Ganga's fall) is very wonderful.
1::45::3::Then Rama along with Lakshmana spent the whole night reflecting on the auspicious story narrated by Viswamitra.
1::45::4::Thereafter, the progeny of the Raghus, the destroyer of enemies (Rama) addressed Viswamitra in the clear early morning after Viswamitra had completed his routine rites:
1::45::5:: O Noble ascetic we have heard this great story worthy to be listened. As we both lay pondering over the entire story (narrated by you), the glorious night passed off just like a moment.
1::45::6::We will cross over Ganga, the best of rivers, the sacred river that flows in three directions.This boat of pious saints which is well laidout has come here swiftly, having come to know that you, O Venerable one have arrived.
1::45::7::Hearing the words of noble Rama, he (Viswamitra), accompanied by hosts of sages besides Rama and Lakshmana made arrangements to cross (the river).
1::45::8::Having reached the northern bank, they paid homage to the sages encamped on the bank of  Ganga and beheld the city of Vishala.  
1::45::9::Thereupon Viswamitra, the best of ascetics, accompanied by Rama and Lakshmana soon proceeded towards the enchanting and splendid city of Vishala comparable to heaven.
1::45::10::Thereafter great intellectual, Rama, with folded palms enquired of eminent ascetic Viswamitra, about the excellent city of Vishala. 
1::45::11::O Distinguished ascetic, which royal dynasty is ruling this city of Vishala? Could you tell me? Great is my curiosity. May you prosper
1::45::12::Viswamitra, preeminent among ascetics, hearing the words of Rama commenced to relate the history of the ancient city of Vishala.
1::45::13::O Rama hear the auspicious legend of Indra. Listen, too, what had happened to this country. 
1::45::14::O Blessed Rama in kritayuga, the sons of Diti were very strong and those of Aditi were spirited and righteous.
1::45::15::O Best among men a thought came to those illustrious ones, 'how can we be  free from old age, death and disease'? 
1::45::16::O Rama While the noble sons were reflecting over this matter an idea flashed across their minds to get nectar by churning the ocean of milk.
1::45::17::Thereupon, having decided to churn (the ocean mind) those very powerful ones, made Vasuki, (the great snake), as a rope and Mandara mountain as the churning rod.And started churning it.
1::45::18::After a thousand years, the hoods of the snake made as rope vomitted venom and started biting the rocks of the Mandara mountain with their teeth. 
1::45::19::Therefrom was produced halahala, virulent venom resembling fire.The entire universe  consisting of devatas, asuras and mortals was burnt down.
1::45::20::The devatas sought refuge in the great god Rudra who causes happiness, the Lord of all living beings. 'Save us, Save us', the cried.
1::45::21:: Thereupon, Hari the Lord of celestial beings extolled by the devatas appeared bearing the conch and discus.
1::45::22::Hari, smiling said to the tridentbearing Rudra O Chief of celestial beings you were born the earliest among the devatas. Therefore, while churning the ocean whichever is produced first shall be offered to you. Considering it the first offering, O Lord accept this venom.
1::45::23::Visnu, the highest among the devatas having the spoken, vanished. Siva who had heard Visnu's words and seen the fear of the gods received that  dreadful halahala  treating it as nectar.
1::45::24::Lord of the gods, venerable Siva went away to his abode leaving behind the devatas. O Descendant of Raghu then all the devatas and asuras resumed churning.
1::45::25::'O Sinless one after the mountain (Mandara) used as churning rod sank down to nether world (patala) the devatas along with the gandharvas invoked Visnu'.
1::45::26::O mightyarmed Visnu you are the ultimate refuge for all living beings, specially for the devatas. Protect us, you (alone) are fit to lift up the Mandara mountain. 
1::45::27::Having heard these words, the controller of the sense organs, Visnu, assumed the form of a tortoise reclined in the ocean supporting the mountain on its back.
1::45::28:: Visnu, the Supreme being, the soul of the universe standing amidst the devatas took hold of the peak of mountain with his hand and continued to churn the ocean.
1::45::29::In this way thousand years rolled by. In the beginining came out Dhanvantari holding a staff and a water pot (carried by ascetics) and apsaras of high lustre. 
1::45::30::O Best among men excellent women emerged out of the essence produced by churning of waters. Therefore they are known as apsarasas. 
1::45::31:: O Kakutstha there appeared sixty crore highly lustrous apsarasas. Their  attendants were countless in number.
1::45::32::Neither devas nor danavas accept them in marriage. Unmarried, all of them have been regarded as belonging to all.
1::45::33::O Joy of the Raghus (Rama) thereafter Varuna's daughter Varuni (goddess of wine) came out searching for a consort.
1::45::34::O Rama while Diti's sons did not accept the unblemished Varuni, O heroic one, the sons of Aditi did.
1::45::35::For that reason, sons of Diti were called asuras. Aditi's sons were known as suras. Devatas grew exceedingly glad for having Varuni.
1::45::36::O Foremost among men (Rama) ucchaishravas, the best of horses (the celestial horse), kausthubham, the best jewel and also nectar came (from churning).
1::45::37::O Rama the race of devatas and daityas suffered great destruction because of (their fight for) that nectar. Thereafter Aditi's sons, the devatas killed Diti's sons, the daityas.
1::45::38:: O Heroic Rama all the asuras along with the rakshasas joined on one side. A violent and a dreadful battle which threw the three worlds in to a great confusion, ensued.
1::45::39::When everything was destroyed completely, the exceedingly powerful Visnu assuming the form of Mohini a charming woman (elusive form) with the power of illusion quickly stole away the nectar.
1::45::40:: Those who opposed the imperishable, supreme purusha, Visnu, in the battle were crushed by all powerful Visnu.
1::45::41::In that great and terrible battle between daityas and devatas, Aditi's sons killed Diti's. 
1::45::42::Indra, having killed the sons of Diti was happy with the kingdom gained. He ruled the worlds in the company of rishis and celestial singers.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे पञ्चचत्वारिंशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the fortyfifth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
