1::75::1::O Rama, Rama, son of Dasaratha I have heard in full of your marvellous prowess and your feat in breaking the bow of Siva.  
1::75::2::The fact that you have broken Siva's bow is an astonishing act. It is beyond imagination. Having heard it I have come here with another auspicious bow.
1::75::3::This mighty, dreadful bow was obtained through Jamadagni. You may display your prowess by fixing on it an arrow. 
1::75::4::O Rama after witnessing your strength in stretching and stringing this bow, I shall engage you in a duel acclaiming your prowess.
1::75::5::When king Dasaratha heard these words, his face fell. He humbly pleaded with him his hands folded:
1::75::6::You are a brahmana, highly renowned and withdrawn from anger against kshatriyas. It behoves of you to give assurance of security to my sons who are young. 
1::75::7::Born in the family of (saint) Bhrigu versed in the study of the Vedas and  observance of vows. You have promised in the name of  the thousandeyed Indra to renounce the arms.
1::75::8::By adhering to righteousness in life and having conferred the earth upon Kasyapa, you retired to the forest and made your residence on the Mahendra mountain.
1::75::9::O Great ascetic today you have arrived evidently for the total destruction of our family. If Rama is killed none of us will survive.
1::75::10::Disregarding these words of Dasaratha, the valiant son of Jamadagni said to Rama.
1::75::11::These two excellent celestial bows are wellknown throughout the worlds. They are stout and strong. They are the best of all, wellmade by Visvakarma.
1::75::12::O Best among men O Descendant of Kakustha one of these broken by you, was given by the gods to the threeeyed Siva, who, wishing to fight the demon Tripura with this bow, destroyed him.
1::75::13::This second bow which is unassailable was given by chief of the celestials to Visnu. O Rama born in the race of Kakutstha this highly radiant bow of Visnu is as strong as the bow of Siva.
1::75::14::Then all the gods in order to ascertain the strength and weakness of Siva and Visnu enquired of the Grandsire, Brahma:
1::75::15::Foremost among the truthful, Grandsire Brahma come to know the intention of the gods and triggered a conflict between the gods.
1::75::16::In that thrilling fight between Siva and Visnu, each desirous of victory over the other, a ferocious battle took place causing one's hair to stand on end.  
1::75::17::Then, with the 'Humkara' produced by Visnu, Siva's bow of dreadful prowess was stretched, which struck the threeeyed Mahadeva motionless.
1::75::18::Then hosts of sages, charanas and the gods assembled there and beseeched both of them, the preeminent among the gods to keep peace.
1::75::19::Now that the bow of Siva was made inert by Visnu's prowess, hosts of sages and  gods acknowlged Visnu as superior.
1::75::20::Glorious Siva, enraged at this, placed the bow together with the arrow in the hands of Rajarshi Devarata in the country of Videha. 
1::75::21::This bow of Visnu, O Rama capable of conquering hostile cities, was given in trust to Richika belonging to the race of Bhrigu. 
1::75::22::Brilliant Ruchika gave this bow to his son, the great Jamadagni, my father, a man of unrivalled valour. 
1::75::23::My father equipped with ascetic energy renounced the weapon and was killed by Kartaveeryarjuna in a vulgar manner.  
1::75::24::O Rama Having heard the slaying of my father incomparable in extreme ruthlessness, I decimated the Kshatriya race again and again out of fury as they were born and reborn. I conquered the entire earth. At the conclusion of the sacrifice I conferred it on the great soul Kasyapa of meritorious acts. Gifted with ascetic energy I have (now) made the Mahendra mountain my abode.  
1::75::25::O Mighty Rama when I heard that you have broken the bow with your extraordinary prowess, I have come here quickly.
1::75::26::Respect the duties of a kshatriya, O Rama Take hold of this great, uncommon bow of Visnu inherited by me from my father and forefathers.
1::75::27::O Descendant of Kakustha this best bow is capable of conquering enemy cities. Fix an arrow. If it is possible for you to do so, then I shall engage you in a duel.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे पञ्चसप्ततितमस्सर्ग: ।।Thus ends the seventyfifth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
