1::73::1::राजा king, यस्मिन् on which, दिवसे day, उत्तमम् best, गोदानम् gift of cows, चक्रे made, तस्मिन् तु on that दिवसे day, शूर: heroic, युथाजित् Yudhajit, समुपेयिवान् arrived.
1::73::2::केकयराजस्य king Kekaya's, पुत्र: son, साक्षात् directly, भरतमातुल: maternal uncle of Bharata, राजानम् king Dasaratha, दृष्ट्वा having seen, कुशलम् welfare, पृष्ट्वा च having enquired, राजानम् addressing the king, इदं this word, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::73::3::केकयाधिपति: lord of Kekaya, राजा king, स्नेहात् out of affection, कुशलम् welfare, अब्रवीत् spoken, येषाम् whose, कुशलकाम: असि are desiring the welfare, तेषाम् their, सम्प्रति now,  अनामयम् healthy.  
1::73::4::रघुनन्दन O Joy of Raghus, राजेन्द्र O Indra among kings, महीपति: king of Kekaya, मम my, स्वस्रीयम् son of my sister, द्रष्टुकाम: wishing to see, तदर्थम् on that account, अहम् I, अयोध्याम् towards Ayodhya, उपयात: have gone. 
1::73::5::महीपते O King, तव your, आत्मजान् sons, विवाहार्थम् for their marriage, त्वया सह along with you, मिथिलाम् to Mithila, उपयातान् having arrived, अयोध्यायाम् Ayodhya, श्रुत्वा listened, अहम् I, स्वसु: sister's, सुतम् son, द्रष्टुकाम: desiring to see, त्वरया speedily, अभ्युपयात: came.  
1::73::6::अथ afterwards, राजा king, दशरथ: Dasaratha, उपस्थितम् attended, प्रियातिथिम् dear guest, दृष्ट्वा having seen, पूजार्हम् deserving the honours, परमसत्कारै: with supreme honours, समपूजयत् extended. 
1::73::7::तत: thereafter, महात्मभि: with the illustrious, पुत्रै: सह with sons, ताम् that, रात्रिम् night, उषित: having dwelt, कर्मवित् knower of duties, प्रभाते at dawn, पुन: again, उत्थाय having arisen, कर्माणि daily devotions, कृत्वा having made, तदा then, ऋषीन् rishis, पुरस्कृत्य preceded by, यज्ञवाटम् sacrificial place, उपागमत् reached. 
1::73::8::युक्ते at auspicious, विजये Vijaya, मुहुर्ते time, सर्वाभरणभूषितै: adorned with ornaments ,भ्रातृभि: with brothers, सहित: accompanied by, राम: Rama, कृतकौतुकमङ्गल: with all the auspicious rites preparatory to marriage having been performed, वसिष्ठम् Vasistha, अपरान् other, महर्षीनपि maharshi also, पुरत: कृत्वा keeping ahead, पितु: father's, समीपम् presence, आश्रित्य having reached, भ्रातृभि: with brother, आवृत: surrounded by, तस्थौ remained. 
1::73::9::भगवान् adorable, वसिष्ठ: Vasishta, वैदेहम् king Janaka, एत्य approaching him, इदम् these words, अब्रवीत् spoke, राजन् O King, नरवर श्रेष्ठ excellent among men, राजा दशरथ: king Dasaratha, कृतकौतुकमङ्गलै: having performed all the auspicious rites preparatory to their marriage, पुत्रैः with sons, दातारम् bestower of bride, अभिकाङ्क्षते is awaiting.
1::73::10::सर्वार्था: all the ends, दातृप्रतिग्रहीतृभ्याम् through the giver and receiver, प्रभवन्ति हि takes place, उत्तमम् वैवाह्यम् excellent (auspicious) marriage, कृत्वा having performed, स्वधर्मम्   own duty, प्रतिपद्यस्व fulfill.
1::73::11::महात्मना magnanimous, वसिष्ठेन by Vasishta, इति thus, उक्त: having been spoken, परमोदार: exceedingly generous, महातेजा highly lustrous, परमधर्मवित् eminent in ethics and morality, वाक्यम् words, प्रत्युवाच replied.
1::73::12::मे my, प्रतिहार: guarding the door, क: who, स्थित: is waiting, कस्य whose, आज्ञा command,  सम्प्रतीक्ष्यते awaiting, स्वगृहे own house, क: what, विचार: अस्ति hesitation is there, इदम् this, राज्यम् kingdom,  तव यथा is like yours. 
1::73::13::मुनिश्रेष्ठ O Best of ascetics, मम my, कन्या daughters, कृतकौतुकसर्वस्वा: having performed  completely all the rites relating to marriage, दीप्ता: shining, वह्ने: fire's, अर्चिष इव like the lustre of flames, वेदिमूलम् foot of the altar, उपागता: arrived.
1::73::14::सज्ज: kept ready, अहम् I, अस्याम् on this, वेद्याम् altar, प्रतिष्ठित: staying, त्वत्प्रतीक्ष: अस्मि awaiting you, राजा king, अविघ्नम् without hindrance, कुरुताम् let it be done, किमर्थम् why for, अवलम्बते delay.
1::73::15::तदा then, दशरथ: Dasaratha, जनकेन by Janaka, उक्तम् having been spoken, तत् those, वाक्यम् words, श्रुत्वा having listened, सुतान् sons, सर्वान् all, ऋषिगणानपि hosts of ascetics also, प्रवेशयामास made them enter.
1::73::16::तत: thereafter, विदेहानाम् king of Videhas, राजा king, वसिष्ठम् Vasishta, इदम् these (words),  अब्रवीत् spoke, धार्मिक O Adherent of righteousness, विभो O Competent one, ऋषे O Maharshi Vasishta, ऋषिभि: सह together with rishis, लोकरामस्य delighting the worlds, रामस्य Rama's, वैवाहिकीम् relating to the marriage, क्रियाम् ceremonies, कारयस्व make them perform.
1::73::17::भगवान् venerable, महतपा: renowned ascetic, वसिष्ठ: ऋषि: rishi Vasishta, जनकम् addressing king Janaka, तथा इति Be it so, उक्त्वा having said, विश्वामित्रम् to Visvamitra, धार्मिकम् virtuous, शतानन्दं च Satananda, पुरस्कृत्य in the forefront, प्रपामध्ये in the center of the marriage pavillion, विधिवत् in accordance with scriptures, वेदिम् altar, कृत्वा having constructed, गन्धपुष्पै: with fragrant flowers, सुवर्णपालिकाभिश्च with golden hollow plates, साङ्कुरै: with sprouts, छिद्रकुम्भैश्च water pots containing holes, अङ्कुराढ्यै: filled with sprouts, शरावैश्च earthenware vessels, सधूपकै: by burning frgrant insenses, धूपपात्रै: holders of frgrant insenses, शङ्खपात्रै: conch shaped vessels, सृवै: sacrificial ladles, सृग्भि: bowls, अर्घ्याभिपूरितै: filled with with water for Arghya and other purposes, पात्रै: with vessels, लाजपूर्णै: roasted paddy, पात्रीभि: with vessels, अभिसंस्कृतै: sanctified, अक्षतै: rice grains, ताम् that, वेदिम् altar, समन्तत on all sides, अलञ्चकार adorned. 
1::73::18::महातेजा: highly lustrous, भगवान् worshipful, वसिष्ठ: ऋषि: rishi Vasistha, समै: of equal proportions, दर्भै: Darbha grass, विधिवत् according to tradition, मन्त्रपुरस्कृतम् reciting mantra, समास्तीर्य having strewn, विधिमन्त्रपुरस्कृतम् reciting mantras according to scriptures, वेद्याम् on the altar, अग्निम् fire, आदाय having placed, अग्नौ in the fire, जुहाव  offered oblations. 
1::73::19::तत thereafter, राजा king, जनक: Janaka, सर्वाभरणभूषिताम् adorned with various ornaments, सीताम् Sita, समानीय having brought, अग्ने: समक्षम् in the presence of Agni, राघवाभिमुखे facing Rama, संस्थाप्य placing, तदा then, कौसल्यानन्दवर्धनम् enhancing the joy of Kausalya,  अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::73::20::मम my, सुता daughter, तव your, सहधर्मचरी with you observing righteous deeds, सीता Sita, इयम् this girl, एनाम् her, प्रतीच्छ च accept, ते भद्रम् prosperity to you, पाणिम् her hand, पाणिना with your hand, गृह्णीष्व hold.
1::73::21::महाभागा highly fortunate, पतिव्रता devoted, faithful and loyal wife, सदा always, छाया इव like shadow, अनुगता follows, इति thus, उक्त्वा having spoken, राजा king, तदा then,मन्त्रपूतम् sanctified with mantra, जलम् water, प्राक्षिपत् released.
1::73::22::तदा then, साधु साधु इति Well, Well saying so, वदताम् exclaiming, ऋषीणाम् sages, देवानाम् devatas, देवदुन्दुभिनिर्घोष: sounded the celestial kettledrums, महान् great, पुष्पवर्ष: rain of flowers, अभूत् fell.
1::73::23::तदा then, जनक: राजा king Janaka, मन्त्रोदकपुरस्कृताम् with waters sanctified by mantras, सीताम् Sita, दत्वा having given, हर्षेण with delight, अभिपरिप्लुत: eyes suffused with tears, अब्रवीत् said. 
1::73::24::लक्ष्मण Lakshmana, आगच्छ come, मया by me, उद्यताम् ready to be bestowed upon, ऊर्मिलाम् Urmila, प्रतीच्छ accept, पाणिम् her hand, (पाणिना with your hand), गृह्णीष्व hold, कालस्य time, पर्यय: delay, माभूत् let not happen.
1::73::25::जनक: Janaka, तम् to Lakshmana, एवम् thus, उक्त्वा having spoken, भरतं च addressing  Bharata, अभ्यभाषत had spoken, रघुनन्दन O Descendent of Raghu, पाणिना with your hand, माण्डव्या: Mandavi's, पाणिम् hand, गृहाण hold.  
1::73::26::धर्मात्मा Virtuous, जनकेश्वर: monarch Janaka, शत्रुघ्नं चापि addressing Satrghna also, अब्रवीत् spoke, महाबाहो O Mighty armed one, पाणिना with your hand, श्रुतकीर्त्या: Srutakirti's, पाणिम् hand, गृह्णीष्व hold.
1::73::27::काकुत्स्था: O Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna, भवन्त: all of you, सर्वे all, सौम्या: च gentle also, सुचरितव्रता: possess good conduct and faithful vows, पत्नीभि: with your wives, सन्तु become, कालस्य of time, पर्यय: delay, माभूत् let not happen.
1::73::28::ते those, चत्वार: four, जनकस्य Janaka's, वच: words, श्रुत्वा having heard, वसिष्ठस्य Vasishta's, मते consent, स्थिता: staying, पाणिभि: hands, चतसृ़णां those four sisters, पाणीन् hands, अस्पृशन् touched. 
1::73::29::महात्मान: magnanimous, रघुसत्तमा: greatest in the race of Raghu, सभार्या accompanied by their wives, अग्निं sacred fire, वेदिम् altar, राजानमेव च king Janaka, ऋषींश्चैव sages also, प्रदक्षिणीकृत्य having circumabulted, यथोक्तेन in obedience to the directions, विधिपूर्वकम् in accordance with the scriptures, विवाहम् marriage, चक्रु: made.
1::73::30::काकुत्स्थै: Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna, ललितेषु elegant, पाणिषु hands, गृहीतेषु while accepting, अन्तरिक्षात् from the sky, सुभास्वरा with immense splendour, महती great, पुष्पवृष्टि: rain of flowers, आसीत् was showered.
1::73::31::रघुमुख्यानाम् by foremost of Raghus, विवाहे in marriage ceremony, दिव्यदुन्दुभिनिर्घोषै: with sounds of celestial ketledrums, गीतवादित्रनिस्वनै: with sounds of songs and instrumental music, अप्सरस्सङ्घा: troops of apsaras, ननृतु danced, गन्धर्वाश्च gandharvas also, कलम् in indescribable melody, जगु: sang, तत् this, अद्भुतम् wonderful, अदृश्यत was seen.  
1::73::32::ईदृशे in such, तूर्योद्घुष्टनिनादिते when the tunes of wind instruments were sounding, वर्तमाने when this was going on, महौजस: possessing great splendour, ते those brothers, त्रि: three times, अग्निम् fire, परिक्रम्य having gone round, र्भार्या: their consorts, ऊहु: got married.
1::73::33::अथ thereafter, रघुनन्दना: sons of Raghu, सभार्या: along with their wives, उपकार्यां towards their tents, जग्मु: went, राजापि king also, सर्षिसंघ: with hosts of rishis, सबान्धव: with relations, पश्यन् seeing, अनुययौ accompanied them. 
