1::72::1::When Janaka the valiant king of Videha thus spoke (on the genealogy of his family) the mighty ascetic Viswamitra accompanied by Vasishta said to Janaka:
1::72::2::O Preeminent among men the glory of the two races of Ikshvakus as also of Videhas is in comprehensible and immeasurable. There is none equal to these kings of the Ikshvakus and Videhas.     
1::72::3::O King it is a perfect match between Sita and Rama and Urmila and Lakshmana. In respect of piety and beauty  the match is perfect.
1::72::4::O Best of men my words deserve to be heard. This younger brother king Kusadhwaja is knower of righteousness.
1::72::5::O King, O Eminent among men we seek the hands of this virtuous king's two daughters, unrivalled in beauty, on earth, as consorts.
1::72::6::O king we choose your brother's daughters for the great souls: the young Bharata and the sagacious Satrughna.
1::72::7::Bestowed with youth and beauty, these sons of Dasaratha resemble kings in defending the worlds and gods in valour. 
1::72::8::O King of kings (Janaka) the bond between your race with its pious deeds and the Ikshvakus  may be strenghthened by this alliance.
1::72::9::Having heard the words of Viswamitra which echoed the wish of Vasishta, Janaka replied to the eminent ascetics with folded palms.
1::72::10::Since both of you, eminent ascetics, recomended this befitting alliance of the two races on your own, I regard my race as blessed. 
1::72::11::Let it be so, Be blessed Let these two daughters of Kusadhwaja (Mandavi and Srutakirti) be the wives of Satrughna and Bharata respectively and serve them.
1::72::12::O Great ascetic let the valiant four princes take the hands of four princesses on the same day.  
1::72::13::The wise, O Brahmin think the marriage is favourable when Bhaga is Prajapati on the succeeding day of the ascent of the two stars. (that is, when poorva is followed by uttara phalguni).
1::72::14::King Janaka, having spoken these pleasing words, stood up and with folded hands  addressing both the great ascetics:
1::72::15::You have earned me a great religious merit. I shall be always your disciple O Eminent ascestics, occupy these important seats.
1::72::16::Dasaratha has right on the city of Ayodhya as much as I have on this. This right is unquestionable. So do whatever you think right.
1::72::17::To the words of Janaka, king of Videha, king Dasaratha, the descendant of Raghu cheerfully replied:
1::72::18::You both brothers are lords of Mithila. You possess countless virtues. You pay regards to  many rishis and hosts of kings.
1::72::19::Be safe. Be blessed. Let me retire to the camp. I have to perform the rites offerings to the forefathers.
1::72::20:: Then renowned king Dasaratha, took leave of the two great ascetics. Then the rowned king Dasaratha took have of the king (Janaka) immediately following the two great ascetics.
1::72::21::The king (Dasaratha) reached the abode, performed the sharaddha ceremony in accordance with the scriptures. Next day at dawn at appropriate time he gifted away cows (a ceremony performed by initiating the bridegrooms into the marriage.)
1::72::22::For the welfare of each of his sons the king (Dasaratha) religiously gave away a hundred thousand cows to brahmins.
1::72::23::Great among men and affectionate towards his children, (king Dasaratha), the delight of the Raghus donated in the name of his sons' donates to the brahmins four hundred thousand cows. They were capable of abundance of milk. Their horns were plaited with gold. They were accompanied by calves. With them were given away bellmetal vessels for keeping milk and innumerable valuables.
1::72::24::With his sons for whose sake cows have been given away the cheerful king looked like  shining Prajapati surrrounded by the guardians of the world.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे द्विसप्ततितमस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the seventhsecond sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
