1::58::1::राम O Sri Rama, त्रिशङ्को: Trishanku's, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा having heard, तत: afterwards, ऋषिपुत्रशतम् hundred sons of Vasishta, क्रोधसमन्वितम् filled with wrath, राजानम् addressing king, इदम् this word, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::58::2::दुर्बुद्धे O Evil minded one, सत्यवादिना by the truth speaking, गुरुणा by spiritual preceptor, प्रत्याख्यात: refused, तम् him, अतिक्रम्य having by passed, शाखान्तरम् other branch, कथम् how, उपेयिवान् you have reached.
1::58::3::सर्वेषाम् for all, इक्ष्वाकूणाम् kings of Ikshwaku race, पुरोधा: their spiritual preceptor, परम: is highly, गुरु: venerable one, सत्यवादिन: truthspeaking one, वचनम् word, अतिक्रमितुम् to by pass, न शक्यम् not capable of being done.
1::58::4::भगवान् adorable, वसिष्ठ: ऋषि: sage Vasistha, अशक्यमिति incapable(of being accompished) to, उवाच said, तम् such, क्रतुम् sacrifice, तव to you, समाहर्तुम् to perform, वयम् we, कथम् how, शक्ता: are capable.
1::58::5::नरश्रेष्ठ O Best among men, त्वम् you, बालिश: childish, पुन: again, स्वपुरम् your capital, गम्यताम् return, पार्थिव O Monarch, भगवान् venerable, त्रैलोक्यस्य of the three worlds, याजनेऽपि to perform sacrifices, शक्त: is capble, तत् for that reason, तस्य his, अवमानम् dishonour, कर्तुम् to do, कथम् how, शक्ष्यामहे can we be capable of.
1::58::6::स: राजा that king, क्रोधपर्याकुलाक्षरम् confused speech due to anger, तत् that, वचनम् word, श्रुत्वा having listened, पुनरेव again, इदम् this, वचनम् word, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::58::7::तपोधना: O Men having asceticism as wealth, गुरुणा by spiritual preceptor, तथैव च as also, गुरुपुत्रैश्च by the sons of spiritual preceptor, प्रत्याख्यात: अस्मि I am disregarded, अन्याम् another, गतिम् way, गमिष्यामि shall seek, व: to you, स्वस्ति अस्तु farewell to you.
1::58::8::ऋषिपुत्रास्तु saint's sons, घोराभिसंहितम् with fierce intent, तत् that, वाक्यम् word, श्रुत्वा having listened, परमसङ्कृद्धा: highly furious, चण्डालत्वम् chandalahood, गमिष्यसि will obtain, शेपु: cursed.
1::58::9::महात्मान: magnanimous, ते they, एवम् thus, उक्त्वा having spoken, स्वम् their own, आश्रमम् hermitage, विविशु: entered, अथ thereafter, रात्र्याम् night, व्यतीतायाम् having passed, राजा king, चण्डालताम् Chandalahood, गत: obtained.
1::58::10::नीलवस्त्रधरो wearing black garment, नील: dark complexioned, परुष: dirty, ध्वस्तमूर्धज: dishevelled hair, चित्यमाल्यानुलेपश्च besmeared with ashes and wearing wreaths from the cemetery, आयसाभरण: wearing ornaments made of iron, अभवत् became.
1::58::11::राम O Rama, चण्डालरूपिणम् in the form of Chadala, तम् him, दृष्टवा having seen, सर्वे all, मन्त्रिण: counsellors, पौरा: inhabitants of city, ये who, अस्य his, अनुगामिन: सहिता: including followers, प्राद्रवन् fled away.
1::58::12::काकुत्स्थ O Rama, परम् great, आत्मवान् courageous, राजा king, एक: moving alone, दिवारात्रम्  day and night, दह्यमान: burning, तपोनिधिम् rich in asceticism, विश्वामित्रम् towards Visvamitra, जगाम went.
1::58::13::राम O Rama, मुनि: sage, विश्वामित्रस्तु Visvamitra, विफलीकृतम् made worthless, चण्डालरूपिणम् found in the form of Chandala, तम् that, राजानम् king, दृष्ट्वा having seen, कारुण्यम् pity, आगत: obtained.
1::58::14::महातेजा: exceedingly energetic, परमधार्मिक: highly pious, स: he, कारुण्यात् out of compassion, घोररूपिणम् frightful to look, राजानम् king, ते भद्रम् welfare to you, इदम् this word, जगाद spoke.
1::58::15::महाबल mighty, राजपुत्र O Prince, ते your, आगमनकार्यम् purpose of coming, किम् what,  अयोध्याधिपते O Lord of Ayodhya, वीर hero, शापात् from the curse, चण्डालताम् chandalahood, गत: you have obtained.
1::58::16::अथ thereafter, चंण्डालताम् chandala hood, गत: obtained, वाक्यज्ञ: knower of words, राजा king, तद्वाक्यम् that word, आज्ञाय having come to know, प्राञ्जलि: with folded hands in supplication, वाक्यकोविदम् proficient in speech, वाक्यम् word, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::58::17::गुरुणा by the spiritual preceptor, तथैव च and also, गुरुपुत्रै: by his sons, प्रत्याख्यात: अस्मि  I was rejected, तम् that, कामम् desire, अनवाप्यैव without attaining, मया by me, विपर्यय: contrary reward, प्राप्त: obtained.
1::58::18::सौम्य O Gentle sage, सशरीर: with my physical body, दिवम् heaven, यायाम् I may enter, इति thus, मे my, दर्शनम् intention, मया by me, क्रतुशतम् a hundred sacrifices, इष्टम् performed,   तत् that, फलम् fruit of it, नावाप्यते च was not obtained.
1::58::19::सौम्य O Gentle sage, मे by me, अनृतम् untruth, न उक्तपूर्वम् was not uttered earlier, कदाचन never, कृच्छ्रेषु गत: अपि inspite of troubled circumstances, न वक्ष्ये I shall not speak, क्षत्रधर्मेण by kshatriya morality, ते to you, शपे I swear.
1::58::20::बहुविधै: by various kinds of, यज्ञै: with sacrifices, इष्टम् favourite gods were worshipped, प्रजा: my people, धर्मेण with law of righteousness, पालिता: are ruled, महात्मान: eminent, गुरवश्च elders, शीलवृत्तेन by my character and conduct, तोषिता: were pleased.
1::58::21::मुनिपुङ्गव O Preeminent among sages, धर्मे in my duty, प्रयतमानस्य endeavouring, यज्ञम् sacrifice, आहर्तुम् to perform, इच्छतश्च intending, गुरव: spiritual preceptors, परितोषम् pleasure, न गच्छन्ति do not get.
1::58::22::दैवमेव destiny alone, परम् is allpowerful, मन्ये I am thinking, पौरुषम् तु the effort of a man, निरर्थकम् is invain, सर्वम् everything, दैवेन by destiny, आक्रम्यते is occupied, दैवम् destiny, परमा supreme, गति: हि way indeed.
1::58::23::परमार्तस्य highly afflicted, ते your, प्रसादम् favour, अभिकाङ्क्षत: desiring, दैवोपहतकर्मण: with my actions hit by destiny, तस्य such, मे to me, कर्तुम् to do, अर्हसि fit and proper, भद्रम् prosperity to you.
1::58::24:: अन्याम् other, गतिम् refuge, न गमिष्यामि I will not obtain, मे to me, अन्य: other person, शरणम् protector, नास्ति does not exist, दैवम् destiny, पुरुषकारेण with human effort, निवर्तयितुम् to avert, अर्हसि you are capable.
