1::11::1::Great king, I shall tell you the way Sanatkumara, great among the celestials further narrated the story. Listen to my words which may prove useful to you (said Sumantra).
1::11::2::
1::11::3::That king (Dasaratha) will develop friendship with the king of Anga. A highly virtuous daughter named Santa will be born to  king of Anga.
1::11::4:: The famous king Dasaratha will approach the son of the king of Anga known as Romapada.
1::11::5::O righteous king I am issueless. Let Rsyasringa, husband of Santa be ordered to perform the a sacrificial ceremony so that I shall be blessed with I son for the perpetuaion of my race.
1::11::6::On hearing his words and deeply thinking over the matter, the prudent Romapada  agreed to send, Santa's husband (Rsyasringa), capable of blessing him with a son.
1::11::7::The king relieved of his suffering, was highly delighted. He would take the brahmin with him and  perform the sacrificial ritual.
1::11::8::King Dasaratha, lord of the people, and knower of dharma and truth, desirous of performing the sacrifice would ask Rsyasringa, with folded palms for granting a boon to perform a sacrifice in order to obtain children and to attain heaven. The king will get those desires fulfilled through that chief brahmin.
1::11::9::Four sons of immense prowess would be born to him bringing glory and fame to their dynasty. They would be renowned in all the worlds. 
1::11::10::In early times of Kritayuga, this story was narrated by the holy and competent  Sanatkumara, the great one among the devatas.  
1::11::11::Greatest among men, O king, along with vehicles and retinue, you may go and bring him (Rsyasringa) personally with due respect.
1::11::12::Having heard the charioteer's words and having obtained the consent of Vasishta, he    along with his queens and courtiers departed to the place where the brahmin (Rsyasringa) resided. 
1::11::13::Crossing forests and rivers slowly, the king reached the place where that foremost of ascetics lived.
1::11::14::He reached the spot and saw the son of the ascetic, the best of brahmins glowing like fire seated next to Romapada. 
1::11::15::Then the king (Romapada), delighted at heart out of friendship with the king (Dasaratha), offered special hospitality with respectful salutations in accordance with propriety.
1::11::16::Romapada explained his friendship and relationship with him (Dasaratha). Rsyasringa of great intellect in return felicitated Dasaratha.
1::11::17::In this manner, the great among men, the king wellhonoured by Romapada, spent seven or eight days there.And then spoke this to Romapada:
1::11::18::O lord of people, O king, It has been decided to commence an important sacrificial rite. You may send your daughter Santa along with her husband to my city.
1::11::19::Having agreed to the departure of the sage Romapada said, 'Be pleased to go (to Ayodhya) together with your wife'.
1::11::20::The son of the sage assented to the king's command saying 'So be it'. And permitted by him, departed along with wife (for Ayodhya).
1::11::21::Dasaratha and Romapada, pleased with this, wished each other with folded palms and hugged each other with love.
1::11::22::Then king Dasaratha, took leave of  his friend and set out. He despatched swiftfooted messengers to the citizens with the command.
1::11::23::Let the entire city be welldecorated, perfumed, sprinkled with water and cleaned with flags hoisted.  
1::11::24::The people of the city having heard the king's arrival were overjoyed. They did everything as by the king.
1::11::25::Then the king entered that welldecorated city amidst blares of conches and the beating of drums, with the best of the brahmins (Rsyasringa) in the forefront.
1::11::26::The citizens were delighted to behold that brahmin entering the city duly honoured by the king who was equivalent to Indra in valiance৷৷  
1::11::27::He (king Dasaratha) took him in to the inner apartment and extended welcome. He thought that he has as enjoined by the sastras accomplished his objective by bringing him (Rsyasringa).
1::11::28::All the royal ladies, experienced immense delight when they saw the largeeyed Shanta arriving  along with her husband in that manner.
1::11::29::Honoured and worshipped by royal ladies, especially by king Dasaratha, Santa dwelt there for some time comfortably with the sage.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकादशस्सर्ग:।। Thus ends the eleventh sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
