1::68::1::जनकेन by Janaka, समादिष्टा: commanded by, ते they, दूता: messengers, मार्गे on the way, त्रिरात्रम् three nights, उषिताः had spent, क्लान्तवाहना: with their horses tired, अयोध्यां पुरीम् city of Ayodhya, प्राविशन् entered.
1::68::2::राज्ञ: king's, भवनम् palace, आसाद्य having reached, द्वारस्थान् addressing the doorkeepers,  इदम् these words, अब्रुवन् spoke, जनकस्य Janaka's, दूतान् messengers, न: about us, शीघ्रम् immediately, राज्ञे for king, निवेद्यताम् be informed.
1::68::3::इत्युक्ताः having (informed) spoken by them, द्वारपाला: doorkeepers, राघवाय for Dasaratha, न्यवेदयन् informed, ते दूता: those messengers, राजवचनात् obeying the words of king, राजवेश्म royal palace, प्रवेशिता: having been made to enter, देवसङ्काशम् resembling devatas, वृद्धम् aged, दशरथं नृपम् king Dasaratha, ददृशु: beheld.
1::68::4::सर्वे all, दूता: the messengers, बद्धाञ्जलिपुटा: folding the hands together in supplication, विगतसाध्वसा: freed from apprehensions, प्रयता: in reverence, राजानम् addressing king, मधुराक्षरम् in sweet (complimentary ), वाक्यम् words, अब्रुवन् said: 
1::68::5::महाराज O Great monarch, मैथिल: Mithila's lord, जनक: राजा king Janaka, साग्निहोत्रपुरस्कृतम् treating with sacred fire and oblations with resepect by placing the sacred fire in the forefront, सोपाध्यायपुरोहितम् with spiritual preceptors and priests, सपुरस्सरम् with attendants ahead of you, त्वाम् you, मधुरया sweet, स्नेहसंयुक्तया endowed with affection, गिरा with words, कुशलं च welfare, अव्ययं चैव imperishability, मुहु: महुः again and again, पृच्छते is enquiring.   
1::68::6::मिथिलाधिप: king of Mithila, वैदेह: Janaka, अव्यग्रम् diligently, कुशलम् welfare, पृष्ट्वा having ascertained, कौशिकानुमते with the permission of Viswamitra, भवन्तम् to you, इदम् this, वाक्यम् word, अब्रवीत् said.
1::68::7::मम आत्मजा my daughter, वीर्यशुल्का as a reward of prowess, पूर्वम् formerly, प्रतिज्ञा vow, विदिता known to everybody, कृतामर्षा: made indignant, निर्वीर्या: powerless, राजान: kings also, विमुखीकृता: were made to turn back.
1::68::8::राजन् O King, सा इयम् that this, मम my, सुता daughter, विश्वामित्रपुरस्सरै: with Viswamitra at the forefront ahead, यदृच्छया casually, आगतै: who had come, तव your, वीरै: heroic ones, पुत्रकै: by your sons, निर्जिता has been won.
1::68::9::महाराज O Great among kings, राजन् Dasaratha, तत् that, दिव्यम् divine, धनु: bow, महत्याम् in the illimitable glory, जनसंसदि in the assembly of people, महात्मना by the magnanimous, रामेण by Rama, मध्ये in the middle, भग्नम् is broken.
1::68::10::वीर्यशुल्का the 'Reward for Prowess', सीता Sita, अस्मै to this, महात्मने eminent one, मया by me, देया fit to be given, प्रतिज्ञाम् vow, कर्तुम् to fufill, इच्छामि desiring, तत् for that reason, अनुज्ञातुम् to give your consent, अर्हसि behoves of you.
1::68::11::महाराज O Mighty king, सोपाध्याय: with your preceptors, पुरोहितपुरस्सर: with official priest walking ahead, शीघ्रम् speedily, आगच्छ come here, ते भद्रम् prosperity to you, राघवौ Rama   and Lakshmana, द्रष्टुम् to behold, अर्हसि behoves of you.
1::68::12::राजेन्द्र O Indra among kings, मम for me, प्रीतिम् pleasure, निर्वर्तयितुम् to cause, अर्हसि it behoves of you, त्वमपि you also, उभयो: both of your, पुत्रयो: sons, प्रीतिम् delight, लप्स्यसे will obtain.
1::68::13::विदेहाधिपति: king of Videha, विश्वामित्राभ्यनुज्ञात: with Viwsamitra's approval, शतानन्दमते in line with Satananda's thinking, स्थित: staying, एवम् thus, मधुरम् sweet, वाक्यम् words, अब्रवीत् spoke, दूता: messengers, इति उक्त्वा having thus spoken, राजगौरवशङ्किता: fearing out of respect for king, विरता: concluded.
1::68::14::स: राजा that king, तत् that, दूतवाक्यम् words of messengers, श्रुत्वा having listened, परमहर्षित: exceedingly rejoiced, वसिष्ठम् Vasishta, वामदेवम् Vamadeva, अन्यान् other, मन्त्रिणश्च ministers, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::68::15::असौ this, कौसल्यानन्दवर्धन: enhancing the joy of Kausalya, कुशिकपुत्रेण by the son of Kusika, Visvamitra, गुप्त: protected, भ्रात्रा along with brother Lakshmana, विदेहेषु in the country of Videha, वसति living.
1::68::16::काकुत्स्थ: Rama, महात्मना by the illustrious, जनकेन by Janaka, दृष्टवीर्य: having proved the prowess (that Janaka), सुताया: daughter's, सम्प्रदानम् bestowal, राघवे to Rama, कर्तुम् to do, इच्छति is desiring.
1::68::17::महात्मन: of the distinguished, जनकस्य Janaka's, वृत्तम् behaviour (character ), व: to you, रोचते यदि is approved (looked) by you with favour, शीघ्रम् immediately, पुरीम् city of Mithila, गच्छामहे shall go, कालस्य time's, पर्यय: delay, माभूत् let not be there.
1::68::18::सर्वै: by all, महर्षिभि: सह maharshis, मन्त्रिण: along with all the ministers, बाढमिति certainly  so, आहु: said, सुप्रीत: highly delighted, स: राजा that king, श्व: tomorrow, यात्रा journey, इति so, मन्त्रिण: addrressing ministers, अब्रवीत् spoke. 
1::68::19::सर्वै: by all, गुणै: excellent virtues, समन्विता: endowed with, नरेन्द्रस्य king Janaka's, मन्त्रिणस्तु counsellors, परमसत्कृता: highly honoured, मुदिता: were pleased, रात्रिम् night, ऊषु: spent.
