1::5::1::Formerly, this entire earth belonged to  those victorious kings starting from Prajapati (Manu).
1::5::2::Among them a king named Sagara got the ocean dug and his sixty thousand sons surrounded him whenever he went (to battle).
1::5::3::It was from the family of mighty monarchs with Ikshvaku as its founder and the kings born in that race, the celebrated epic known as the 'Ramayanam' arose.
1::5::4::I shall propagate this Ramayanam, incorporating the merits of dharma, artha and kama, and complete in all respects. It deserves to be heard right from the start without prejudice.            
1::5::5::On the banks of river Sarayu, a great and prosperous country named Kosala, abundant in foodgrains and wealth and inhabited by contended people, was situated. 
1::5::6::In the country called Kosala was the famous capital city of Ayodhya built by the lord of men, Manu .
1::5::7::With welllaid out thoroughfares, the beautiful and prosperous city of Ayodhya extended for twelve yojanas in length and three yojanas in breadth. 
1::5::8::It looked splendid with its welllaid out and broad highway strewn with flowers and regularly sprinkled with water.
1::5::9::King Dasartha, augmenting the prosperity of the great kingdom, lived in the city of Ayodhya like Indra in heaven. 
1::5::10::The city where all kinds of artificers lived had arched outer gateways, wellarranged local markets and all kinds of instruments and weapons.
1::5::11::With matchless splendour, it abounded in eulogists and genealogists. It contained stately edifices decorated with flags and hundreds of sataghnis (missiles).
1::5::12::The city with suburban towns on all sides had several female dancers and actors.It was filled with gardens and mangogroves. And girdled by sal trees.
1::5::13::It was enclosed by strong fortifications and a deep moat. No enemy can ever enter and occupy that city. It abounded with several elephants and horses, cattle, camels and mules. 
1::5::14::It was embellished with a host of tributary kings who used to pay tributes and with  merchants from different countries.  
1::5::15::Like Indra's Amaravati, it was adorned by mountains and mansions with precious stones.
1::5::16::With groups of men and women and adorned with sevenstoried palaces, it looked wonderful like a board where the game of ashtapada, is played. It was rich in all kinds of gems.
1::5::17::Its dwellings were constructed on levelled ground with no space left unutilised it was abundant stocked with fialgrained rice and water which fasted sweet like sugarcane juice.
1::5::18::The city echoed with the sounds of trumpets, mrudangas, vinas and panavas. There was no city on earth superior to Ayodhya.
1::5::19::Like an aerial car acquired by the siddhas in heaven through their austerities, the palaces were perfectly constructed in rows and inhabited by the noblest of men.
1::5::20::The city was inhabited by thousands of warriors known as maharathas. They were skilled archers and sharphanded. They would not pierce with arrows, solitary persons, persons without defence, fleeing foes who could be tracked down through hints from sound. With sharp arrows or with the strength of their arms, they would kill roaring and inebriated lions, tigers, boars etc. in the forest. It was in that city (of Ayodhya) that king Dasaratha lived.
1::5::21::That city (of Ayodhya) was filled with excellent dwijas (brahmana, kshatriya and vaisyas) performing rituals of sacrificial fire, virtuous and wellversed in the Vedas and Vedangas. They were generous, truthful and dignified. They were almost equal to rishis and maharshis.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे पञ्चमस्सर्ग:।। Thus ends the fifth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
