1::33::1::धीमत: of sagacious, तस्य कुशनाभस्य of that Kusanabha's, तद्वचनम् those words, श्रुत्वा having heard, कन्याशतम् the hundred maidens, शिरोभि: with their heads, चरणौ his feet, स्पृष्ट्वा having touched, अभाषत said.
1::33::2::राजन् O King, सर्वात्मक: all pervading, वायु: windgod, अशुभम् foul, मार्गम् way, आस्थाय having taken recourse, प्रधर्षयितुम् to outrage, इच्छति is desiring, धर्मम् the law of morality, न प्रत्यवेक्षते does not consider.  
1::33::3::वयम् we, पितृमत्य: स्म: have our father, ते भद्रम् may prosperity be to you, स्वच्छन्दे freely, न स्थिता: (we are) not situated, न: us, तव to you, दास्यते यदि whether he gives, त्वम् you, न: our, पितरम् father, वृणीष्व request.
1::33::4::एवम् in this way, ब्रुवन्त्य: while we were speaking, सर्वा: all of us, पापानुबन्धेन by the sinful one, वचनम् our words, न प्रतीच्छता without accepting, तेन वायुना by that windgod, भृशम् greatly, निहता: we are smitten.
1::33::5::परमधार्मिक: the highly virtuous one, महातेजा: highly powerful, राजा the king, तासाम् theirs, तत् वचनम् those words, श्रुत्वा having heard, अनुत्तमम् excellent, कन्याशतम् hundred daughters, प्रत्युवाच replied.
1::33::6::पुत्र्य: you, Daughters, क्षमावताम् of those having forberance, कर्तव्यम् fit to be done, क्षान्तम् forbearance, कृतम् has been done, सुमहत् great, ऐकमत्यम् unanimity, उपागम्य taking recourse to, मम my, कुलं च dynasty, अवेक्षितम् is taken into consideration.
1::33::7::नारीणाम् for women, पुरुषस्य वा or for men, क्षमा forbearance, अलङ्कारो हि is an ornament, क्षान्तम् इति यत् which act of  forgiving, तत् दुष्करम् that one is difficult, त्रिदशेषु even for gods, विशेषत: especially difficult, पुत्र्य: Daughters, व: all of you, सर्वासाम् for the rest, अविशेषत: without difference, यादृशी similar to that.
1::33::8::क्षमा forbearance, दानम् charity, क्षमा forbearance, यज्ञः sacrifice, पुत्रिका: Daughters, क्षमा forbearance, सत्यं हि is truth indeed, क्षमा forberance, यश: glory, क्षमा forbearance, धर्म: virtue, जगत् the universe, क्षमया by forbearance, निष्ठितम् is supported.
1::33::9::काकुत्स्थ O Rama, त्रिदशविक्रम: a man endowed with the prowess of celestials, मन्त्रज्ञ: one who is wellversed in counselling, राजा the king, कन्या: daughters, विसृज्य leaving, मन्त्रिभि: सह along with ministers, प्रदानम् bestowing of maidens, मन्त्रयामास consulted, प्रदानस्य for bestowing, देशकालौ proper time and place, सदृशे for a suitable person, प्रतिपादनम् about giving in marriage (consulted). 
1::33::10::एतस्मिन् काले एव during the same time, महातपा: a great ascetic, ऊर्ध्वरेता: living in celebacy, शुभाचार: having clean and auspicious behaviour, चूली नाम named Chuli, ब्राह्मम् in pursuit of knowledge of Brahman, तप: austerities, उपागमत् obtained.
1::33::11::तदा then, तत्र there, तप्यन्तम् him who was performing austerities, तम् ऋषिम् that Rishi, ऊर्मिला तनया daughter of Urmila, सोमदा नाम nymph named Somada, गन्धर्वी Gandharva maiden, पर्युपासते doing service, ते भद्रम् prosperity to you.
1::33::12::सा च she, तम् that Chuli, प्रणता भूत्वा bowing down, शुश्रूषणपरायणा devoted to his service, धर्मिष्ठा adhering to virtue, उवास lived, काले in a proper time, गुरु: the spiritual guide, तस्या: in her, तुष्ट: अभवत् was gratified. 
1::33::13::स: च that maharshi Chuli, कालयोगेन when her services have come to fruition with the passage of time, ताम् addressing her, प्रोवाच said, परितुष्ट: अस्मि I am pleased, ते भद्रम् posperity to you, तव to you, किम् what, प्रियम् favour, करोमि shall I do?
1::33::14::मुनिम् sage, परितुष्टम् gratified, ज्ञात्वा having known, मधुरस्वरा in sweet tone, वाक्यज्ञा knower of words, गन्धर्वी gandharvi, परमप्रीता who was exceedingly delighted, वाक्यकोविदम् proficient speech, उवाच said.
1::33::15::महातपा: possessing great ascetism, ब्राह्म्या relating to Brahmana, लक्ष्म्या lustre, समुदित: endowed with, ब्रह्मभूत: like Brahma, धार्मिक O Righteous one, ब्राह्मेण relating to Brahma, तपसा युक्तम् endowed with ascestic virtues, पुत्रम् son, इच्छामि I am desiring.
1::33::16::अपति: च अस्मि I am without husband, ते भद्रम् prosperity to you, कस्य चित् to any one,  भार्या wife, नास्मि I am not, उपगताया: having taken refuge in you, मे to me, ब्राह्मेण with the power of penance, सुतम् son, दातुम् अर्हसि it behoves of you to bestow.
1::33::17::तस्या: to her, प्रसन्न: pleased, ब्रह्मर्षि: Brahmarshi, चूलिन: of Chuli, मानसम् born through the will of his mind, सुतम् son, ब्रह्मदत्त इति Brahmadatta, ख्यातम् wellknown, अनुत्तमम् excellent, पुत्रम् son, ददौ gave.
1::33::18::सौमदेय: the son of Somada, स: राजा that king Brahmadatta, तदा then, देवराज: Devendra, दिवं यथा like heaven, कांपिल्याम् Kampilya, पुरीम् city, परया with great, लक्ष्म्या prosperity, अध्यवसत् lived.
1::33::19::काकुत्स्थ O Rama, तदा then, सुधार्मिक: highly righteous, राजा king, स: कुशनाभ: Kusanabha, कन्याशतम् hundred daughters, ब्रह्मदत्ताय to Brahmadatta, दातुम् to give, बुद्धिं thinking, कृतवान् decided.
1::33::20::महातेजा: highly powerful, महीपति: lord of the earth, राजा king, तम् ब्रह्मदत्तम् that Brahmadatta, आहूय having invited, सुप्रीतेन with highly pleased, अन्तरात्मना heart, कन्याशतम् a hundred daughters, ददौ gave.
1::33::21::रघुनन्दन O Rama, देवपतिर्यथा resembling devendra, ब्रह्मदत्त: महीपाल: king Brahmadatta, तत: then, यथाक्रमम् in due order, तासाम् those maidens', पाणीन् hand, जग्राह received.
1::33::22::तत: thereafter, पाणौ hand, स्पृष्टमात्रे with mere touch, तदा then, कन्याशतम् hundred daughters, विकुब्जा: were devoid of hump back, विगतज्वरा: free from anguish, परमया great, लक्ष्म्या splendour, युक्ता: endowed with, बभु: shone.
1::33::23::महीपति: king, स: कुशनाभ: Kusanabha, वायुना by windgod, मुक्ता: released, दृष्ट्वा having seen, परमप्रीत: immensely pleased, बभूव became, पुन: पुन: again and again, हर्षम् delight, लेभे obtained.
1::33::24::तदा then, महीपति: king, कृतोद्वाहम् having performed marriage, सदारम् together with his wives, सोपाध्यायगणम् in the assembly of priests, राजानम् king, ब्रह्मदत्तम् Brahmadatta, प्रेषयामास sent him to his kingdom.
1::33::25::गन्धर्वी gandharva woman, सोमदापि Somada also,सुसंहृष्टा well pleased, पुत्रस्य son's, सदृशीम् fit and proper, क्रियाम् acts, ता: स्नुषा: those daughtersinlaw, यथान्यायं properly, प्रत्यनन्दत praised.
