1::72::1::महामुनि: mighty ascetic, विश्वामित्र: Visvamitra, वसिष्ठसहित: accompanied by Vasista, उक्तवन्तम् thus spoken, वीरम् valiant, वैदेहम् king of Videha, नृपम् addressing king Janaka, वचनम् words, उवाच said. 
1::72::2::नरपुङ्गव O Preeminent among men, इक्ष्वाकूणाम् of kings of Ikshvaku, विदेहानां च also of Videha, कुलानि races, अचिन्त्यानि beyond comprehension, अप्रमेयानि immeasurable, एषां for  these kings of Ikshvaku and Videha, तुल्य: equal, कश्चन anyone, नास्ति is not there.
1::72::3::राजन् O King, ऊर्मिलया सह along with Urmila, सीता Sita, रामलक्ष्मणयो: for Rama and Lakshmana (is being offered), सदृश: perfectly matched, धर्मसम्बन्ध: the marriage is in accordance with religious merit, रूपसम्पदाच in virtue and beauty, सदृश: is fit.
1::72::4::नरश्रेष्ठ O Best of men, मम my, वक्तव्यं च is fit to be divulged, वचनम् words, श्रूयताम् may be heard, यवीयान् भ्राता this younger brother, एष: राजा this king, कुशध्वज: Kusadhwaja, धर्मज्ञ: knower of righteousness.
1::72::5::राजन् O King, नरश्रेष्ठ O Eminent among men, रूपेण in beauty, भुवि on this earth, अप्रतिमम् unrivalled, अस्य धर्मात्मन: this virtuous one's, सुताद्वयम् two daughters, पत्न्यर्थम् as consorts, वरयामहे we are seeking.
1::72::6::राजन् O King, कुमारस्य of the youthful, भरतस्य Bharata, धीमत: sagacious, शत्रुघ्नस्य च for Satrughna also, महात्मनो: for the magnanimous ones, तयोरर्थे in the interests of both of them, सुते two daughters, वरयाम: we choose.  
1::72::7::इमे these, दशरथस्य पुत्रा: sons of Dasaratha, सर्वे all, रूपयौवनशालिन: shining with youth and beauty, लोकपालोपमा: resembling the kings who are the protectors of the worlds,   देवतुल्यपराक्रमा: equal to devatas in valour.
1::72::8::राजेन्द्र O King, इक्ष्वाको: Ikshvaku's, पुण्यकर्मणः of pious deeds, भवत: your, उभयोरपि both of you, कुलम् races, सम्बन्धेन by this alliance, अन्यग्रम् with clear vision, अनुबध्यताम् let it be tied.
1::72::9::तदा then, वसिष्ठस्य Vasistha's, मते by  wish, विश्वामित्रवच: Viswamitra's words, शृत्वा having listened, जनक: Janaka, प्रांजलि: with folded palms, मुनिपुङ्गवौ addressing eminent asetics, वाक्यम् words, उवाच spoke.
1::72::10::येषाम् न: for those of us, सदृशं befitting, कुलसम्बन्धम् alliance of the two races, मुनिपुङ्गवौ two eminent ascetics, स्वयम् on your own, यत् for which reason, आज्ञापयथ: are commanding, इदम् this, कुलम् race, धन्यम् blessed, मन्ये I consider. 
1::72::11::एवं भवतु let it be so, व: भद्रं: prosperity to you, इमे these, कुशध्वजसुते daughters of Kusadhwaja, सहितौ together moving, शत्रुघ्नभरतौ for Satrughna and Bharata, उभौ for both of them, पत्न्यौ as wives, भजेताम् let them serve.
1::72::12::महामुने O Great ascetic, महाबला: valiant, चत्वार: four, राजपुत्रा: princes, एकाह्ना on the same day, चतसृ़णाम् of the four, राजपुत्रीणाम् princesses, पाणीन् hands, गृह्णन्तु let them take.
1::72::13::ब्रह्मन् O Foremost among brahmins, फल्गुनीभ्याम् उत्तरे दिवसे on the later day of the ascent of the two Phalgunis (Phalgunis are two sisters. The previous day of the ascent of Phalguni stars, Poorva Phalguni wil be ascendent and the folowing day Uttara Phalguni wil be ascendant ), यत्र in which day, प्रजापति: bestower of children, भग: Bhaga, वैवाहिकम् to perform marriage, मनीषिण: wise people, प्रशंसन्ति are praising.  
1::72::14::जनक: राजा king Janaka, एवम् thus, सौम्यम् pleasing, वच: words, उक्त्वा having spoken, प्रत्युत्थाय having stood up, कृताञ्जलि: with folded hands, उभौ both, मुनिवरौ great ascetics, वाक्यम् words, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::72::15::मह्यम् for me, पर: supreme, धर्म: religious merit, कृत: has been done, सदा always, भवतो: for both of you, शिष्य: अस्मि I am a desciple, मुनिपुङ्गवौ eninent ascestics, इमानि these,  आसनमुख्यानि best of thrones, आसाताम् occupy.
1::72::16::इयम् this Mithila, दशरथस्य Dasaratha's, यथा as, अयोध्या पुरी Ayodhya city, मम to me, तथा so it is, प्रभुत्वे in the matter of governance, सन्देह: doubt, नास्ति not there, यथार्हम्  appropriately, कर्तुम् to do, अर्हथ behoves of you.
1::72::17::वैदेहे when the king of Videha, जनके Janaka, तथा in that manner, ब्रुवति while speaking, रघुनन्दन: descendent of Raghu, राजा दशरथ: king Dasaratha, हृष्ट: pleased, महीपतिम् addressing king Janaka, प्रत्युवाच replied.
1::72::18::मिथिलेश्वरौ lords of Mithila, भ्रातरौ brothers, युवाम् both of you, असङ्ख्येयगुणौ have countless virtues, भवद्भ्याम् by you, ऋषय: rishis, राजसङ्घाश्च hosts of kings, अभिपूजिता: have been worshipped. 
1::72::19::स्वस्ति safety, प्राप्नुहि you may obtain, ते भद्रम् prosperity to you, स्वम् relating to mine, आलयम् residence, गमिष्यामि I shall go, सर्वाणि all, श्राद्धकर्माणि rites concerning the ceremony in accordance with the rituals, विधास्यामि च I shall perform, इति thus, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::72::20::तदा then, महायशा: renowned, राजा दशरथ: king Dasaratha, तम् that, नरपतिम् king men, आपृष्ट्वा having taken leave of, तौ those two, मुनीन्द्रौ ascetics, पुरस्कृत्य placing them in the forefront, आशु immediately, जगाम went away.
1::72::21::स: that, राजा king, निलयम् residence, गत्वा having gone, विधानत: according to scriptures, श्राद्धम् Shraddha ceremony, कृत्वा having performed, प्रभाते at dawn, उत्थाय having risen, काल्यम् appropriate to the time, उत्तमम् excellent, गोदानम्  gifting of cows (a ceremony duly initiating the marriage, vow of Snathaka ), चक्रे made. 
1::72::22::नराधिप: lord of men, राजा king, पुत्रान् sons, एकैकश: for each one, उद्धिश्य referring to their  names, ब्राह्मणेभ्य: for brahmins, गवाम् cows, शतसहस्राणि in hundred thousands, धर्मत: in accordance with law, ददौ bestowed.
1::72::23::पुरुषर्षभ: great among men, पुत्रवत्सल: affectionate towards his children, रघुनन्दन: Dasaratha, पुत्राणाम् sons', गोदानम् gifting away of cows, उद्धिश्य with reference to that, सुवर्णश्रुङ्गा: with their horns plaited with gold, सम्पन्ना: endowed with abundance(of milk), सवत्सा: accompanied by calves, कांस्यदोहना: bronze vessels for milking, गवाम् of cows, चत्वारि four, शतसहस्राणि a hundred thousand, अन्यत् other, सुबहु innumerable, वित्तम् च valuables, द्विजेभ्य: for brahmins, ददौ bestowed.
1::72::24::कृतगोदानै: having distributed the cows, सुतै: with his sons, वृत: surrounded, स: that, नृपति: king, तदा then, लोकपालै: by guardians of worlds, वृत: surrounded, सौम्य: pleased, प्रजापतिरिव like brahma, आभाति shining.
