1::48::1::Getting together they enquired one another's health. And then Sumati spoke to the great ascetic (Viswamitra).
1::48::2::O Sage, wish you well Who are these two youths who seem to possess the  prowess of celestial beings. They walk with the gait of an elephant or a lion. They are courageous like tiger or a bull. Their large eyes are like lotuspetals. They are armed with scimitars, bows and quivers. They are young and handsome like Aswinikumaras dropped from heaven casually. Whose sons are they? How did they  come here on foot? With what purpose?
1::48::3::O Great ascetic they resemble each other in personality, expression and gestures. They adorn this land like Sun and moon in the sky holding excellent weapons. These heroes have trodden paths difficult to traverse. For what purpose have they come? I want to hear clearly.
1::48::4::On hearing his words, he (Viswamitra) related all about their stay at Siddhashrama and the slaying of rakshasas.
1::48::5::After hearing Viswamitra, the king (Sumati) got exceedingly delighted and extended hospitality in accordance with tradition to the highly valiant sons of Dasaratha, the distinguished guests worthy of honour.
1::48::6::The descendants of Raghu (Rama and Lakshmana) having received great honour from Sumati, stayed there one night and thereafter set out for Mithila.
1::48::7::All the ascetics, having seen that auspicious city of Janaka worshipfully admired Mithila saying, 'Excellent, Excellent'
1::48::8::At the sight of an old uninhabited, beautiful and desolate hermitage in a grove near Mithila, the descendant of the Raghus enquired of the foremost among the ascetics (Viswamitra):
1::48::9:: O Venerable one I wish to know why this auspicios looking hermitage was deserted by ascetics? To whom did this belong in the past.
1::48::10::Eloquent and brilliant Viswamitra, replied to the descendant of the Raghus saying:
1::48::11:: O Descendant of the Raghus I shall tell all you about this hermitage cursed by the wrath of a great man.
1::48::12::O Best among men this hermitage resembling a celestial retreat and wellhonoured even by devatas  once belonged to illustrious Gautama.
1::48::13::O Highly renowned prince it was here in ancient times that Gautama in the company of Ahalya practised austerities for several years.
1::48::14::The thousandeyed Indra, consort of Sachi, having found an opportunity (during the absence of the ascetic), assumed the guise of the ascetic (Gautama) and said to Ahalya:
1::48::15:: 'O most beautiful one those overtaken by passion would not await the completion of the menstrual period (favourable for copulation). O woman of fine waist I desire union with you.'
1::48::16::O Delight of the Raghus the evilintentioned Ahalya, inclined towards the king of the celestials and  knowing him to be the thousandeyed Indra in the guise of the ascetic, consented for the union.
1::48::17::O Foremost of men with her heart's desire fulfilled, Ahalya said: O Chief of the celestials I'm satisfied. O Lord, quit this place: O Lord of cthe gods, protect yourself and also me from Gautama in all respects.
1::48::18::Indra smilingly said to Ahalya, 'O One with lovely hips, I am  gratified. I shall go away the way I have come'.
1::48::19::O Rama he (Indra) came out of the leafhut quickly after his union with her, apprehensive of Gautama.
1::48::20::Subsequently, Indra beheld the great ascetic Gautama, unassailable by devatas and danavas, endowed with the power of ascetism, drenched with sacrifical waters,  shining like flaming fire, carrying sacrificial firewood and Kusha grass and preeminent  among sages, entering that leaf hut.
1::48::21::On seeing him, the face of the Lord of the gods (Indra) turned pale with fear. Having seen the wicked Indra with a thousandeyed in the guise of an ascetic the gentle sage Gautama got enraged and said:
1::48::22::O Wicked natured one assuming my form you have done a forbidden act. For that reason you shall be devoid of  scrotum.
1::48::23::Cursed thus out of anger by eminent Gautama the  testicles of Indra immediately dropped down on the earth.
1::48::24:: Having thus cursed Indra, he also cursed Ahalya: 'You will be staying here for thousands of years without food and subsisting on air, lying down in ashes, doing penance, without being seen by any living beings in this ashrama'. 
1::48::25:: 'When the son of Dasaratha, the unassailable Rama enters this dreadful forest, you will be cleansed (of this sin)'.
1::48::26::'O Wickednatured one by offering hospitality to Rama, without covetousness and passion, you will happily live with me by regaining your present form'.
1::48::27:: Highly powerful Gautama who had performed rigid austerities thus cursed the wicked Ahalya and left this hermitage, for the peaks of Himavat mountain served by siddhas and charanas. Here he performed austerities(said Viswamitra).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे अष्टचत्वारिंशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the fortyeighth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
