1::2::1::On hearing the words of Narada the distinguished and righteous sage Valmiki, proficient in composing slokas worshipped him along with his disciples.
1::2::2::The divine sage Narada after having been worshipped by Valmiki in a befitting manner sought his leave and went to heaven.
1::2::3::After Narada had gone to devaloka, sage Valmiki reached the bank of river Tamasa which is not very far from the Ganges for morning ablutions.
1::2::4::The eminent sage Valmiki reached the bank of Tamasa and seen a descent into the river with pellucid waters, spoke to the disciple standing by the side. 
1::2::5::O Bharadwaja, behold the beautiful and pleasant waters of this river. This holy spot  is as clear and pure as the mind of a virtuous man.
1::2::6::O dear one Put down the pitcher on the ground. Give me my garment. I shall take a dip in Tamasa, the holiest of places. 
1::2::7::Asked thus by the nobleminded master Valmiki, Bharadwaja, ever obedient to his spiritual master, gave the sage the bark garment.
1::2::8::Valmiki who had his senses under his command received the barkgarment from the hands of his disciple and wandered about in that extensive forest, looking all around.
1::2::9::Sage Valmiki espied a pair of melodious kraunchas. Flying about in each other's in separable company there in its vicinity. 
1::2::10::A sinful and cruelhearted hunter struck down the male bird of the pair in his very  presence.
1::2::11::The female companion saw the male bird struck down by the hunter and rolling on the earth, drenched in blood. Separated from her winged comparion with coppercrested head intoxicated with her love, the female companion lifted a piteous wail. 
1::2::12::Then, having seen the bird struck down by the fowler, the pious sage Valmiki was filled with compassion.
1::2::13::Having heard the wailing of the female bird, the sage (Valmiki) moved to pity at this irreligious act uttered the following words.
1::2::14::O fowler, since you have killed one of the pair of infatuated kraunchas you will be permanently deprived of your position.
1::2::15::Brooding over his utterances, he reflected, 'What is this that I uttered in reaction to the grief of this bird?'
1::2::16::Very wise and learned, he (Valmiki), preeminent among sages, pondered over it (for a while) and spoke these words to his disciple.
1::2::17::Occasioned by the griefstricken (state of the bird) and composed in rhymed lines each of equal number of syllables tuned to the accompaniment of stringed instruments, let it be known as a sloka and not by any other name.
1::2::18::His disciple, delighted by the excellent verse composed by the sage, committed it to memory which left his spiritual preceptor pleased. 
1::2::19::After having performed his ablution at that holy spot according to the prescribed ritual, the sage (Valmiki) returned (to his hermitage), pondering over the matter.
1::2::20::Then saint Bharadwaja, his disciple humble and learned in scriptures, followed him with a pitcher full (of water).
1::2::21::Valmiki who knows dharma entered the hermitage along with his disciple and sat in meditation and composed other stories. 
1::2::22::At that moment, the effulgent, fourfaced Brahma, creator and lord of the world, himself, desirous of seeing him (Valmiki), the best among sages, arrived.
1::2::23::Greatly surprised to see him, Valmiki, purified by austerities and disciplined in speech, immediately got up and with folded palms stood before him.
1::2::24::Bowing with reverence as enjoined by tradition and having enquired of his well being, Valmiki worshipped the immutable Brahma by falling at his feet and welcoming him with a seat and water to wash his feet with.
1::2::25::Lord Brahma sat down on a highly worshipful seat and showed a seat for the  ascetic Valmiki to be seated.
1::2::26::Having been ordered by Brahma, he also sat down on a seat. Although seated in the presence of the lord of the worlds, he was absorbed in the thought of events (leading to the death of the krauncha ).
1::2::27::The hunter killed the sweetvoiced krauncha without any cause. That sinfulminded one with hostile feeling of capturing it, had perpetrated this cruel act, he thought.
1::2::28::Griefstricken, Valmiki having become introspective and lamenting the plight of the female krauncha  again and again, recited this sloka.
1::2::29::Thereafter lord Brahma smilingly addressed Valmiki, the preeminent among sages, saying, You have indeed composed a sloka.There is no doubt about it.
1::2::30::OBrahmarshi, at my will, this speech had originated from you. Most excellent ascetic, compose the history of Rama in its entirety (in this metre).
1::2::31::Narrate the history of Rama who is renowned for righteousness, virtues, wisdom and steadfastness in the manner you have heard it from sage Narada. 
1::2::32::The incidents pertaining to sagacious Rama together with Lakshmana, Sita, Bharata, etc. and the rakshasas  their deeds, thoughts, unknown or known to everybody and even not known to you, will be revealed to you by my grace. 
1::2::33::Not even a single word of yours in this epic will ever prove untruthful. Compose this sacred, delightful story of Rama, set in the form of slokas.
1::2::34::As long as the mountains and rivers exist on this earth, the story of Ramayana will prevail among the people.
1::2::35::So long as the story of the Ramayana composed by you is remembered in this world, you will live in the upper world, the nether world and Brahmaloka.
1::2::36::Having spoken these words, lord Brahma vanished. At this he and his disciples were astonished.
1::2::37::Thereafter, the disciples of Valmiki chanted this sloka again and again in delight. They were greatly astonished and spoke about it often. 
1::2::38:: This sloka of four lines, each consisting of equal number of syllables, was recited by the maharshi. Constant recitation (by others) elicited admiration (from the listeners).
1::2::39::A thought occurred to Valmiki, who is capable of putting thoughts into action I shall  compose the epic named Ramayana entirely in this metre.
1::2::40::The renowned and sagacious sage composed a kavya with hundreds of charming verses, each containing equal number of syllables and excellent meaningful words set in metre, conferring glory on celebrated Rama.
1::2::41::This story of Rama and the killing of Ravana composed by the sage consists of compound words, melodious sandhis and lines composed in lucid, melodious and meaningful  phrases. Listen to it.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे द्वितीयस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the second sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana in synopsis of the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
