1::25::1::अप्रमेयस्य having super human faculty beyond comprehension, तस्य मुने: that sage's, उत्तमम् excellent, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा having heard, पुरुषशार्दूल: greatest among men, शुभाम् auspicious, गिरम् speech, प्रत्युवाच replied.
1::25::2::मुनिपुङ्गव O Best of ascetics, यक्षा: yakshas, अल्पवीर्या: possess little prowess, यदा श्रूयन्ते since it is being heard, अबला a woman, नागसहस्रस्य thousand elephants', बलम् strength, कथम् how, धारयति possesses. 
1::25::3::विश्वामित्र: Visvamitra, वाक्यम् words, अब्रवीत् spoke, अबला a woman, येन for which ever  reason, बलोत्तरा acquired great strength, शृणु you may listen, वरदानकृतम् by virtue of a boon, वीर्यम् prowess, बलम् strength, धारयति possesses.
1::25::4::पूर्वम् in the days past, सुकेतुर्नाम named Suketu, वीर्यवान् powerful, महायक्ष: great yaksha, आसीत् existed, अनपत्य: he was without children, स: he, शुभाचार: one with pure practices,  महत्  great, तप: penance, तेपे performed.   
1::25::5::राम O Rama, तदा then, पितामह: Brahma, सुप्रीत: highly gratified, तस्य यक्षपते: towards  that king of yakshas, नामत: by name, नाम wellknown as, ताटकां Tataka, कन्यारत्नम् gem of a daughter, ददौ granted.
1::25::6::पितामह: lord Brahma, अस्या: for her, नागसहस्रस्य thousand elephants, बलम् strength, ददौ  granted, महायशा: that illustrious, ब्रह्मा lord Brahma, यक्षाय for that yaksha, पुत्रं तु son, न ददौ did not bestow.
1::25::7::जाताम् born, विवर्धन्तीम् as she was growing, रूपयौवनशालिनीम् shining with youthful charm and beauty, यशस्विनीम् glorious, ताम् her, झर्झपुत्राय son of Jharjha, सुन्दाय for Sunda, भार्याम् as wife, ददौ gave.
1::25::8::अथ thereafter, कस्यचित् कालस्य after some time, यक्षी the female yakshi,Tataka, मारीचं नाम by name Maricha, दुर्धर्षम् unassailable, पुत्रम् son, अजायत gave birth, य: he, शापात् because of the curse, राक्षस: अभवत् became rakshasa.
1::25::9::राम: O Rama, सुन्दे when Sunda, निहते was killed, सा ताटका that Tataka, पुत्रेण सह along with her son, ऋषिसत्तमम् excellent of sages, अगस्त्यम् Agastya, प्रधर्षयितुम् to attack him, इच्छति desires(ed).
1::25::10::सा she, गर्जन्ती roaring, जातसंरम्भा with haste and excitement, भक्षार्धम् to devour, अभ्यधावत rushed towards him, भगवान् venerable, स: अगस्त्य: ऋषि: that Agastya rishi, आपतन्तीम् approaching, ताम् her, दृष्ट्वा having seen, राक्षसत्वम् demons' nature, भजस्व इति partake, मरीचम् Maricha, व्याजहार spoke(cursed).
1::25::11::परमक्रुद्ध: exceedingly wrathful, अगस्त्य: Agastya, ताटकामपि Tataka also, शप्तवान् cursed, इदं रूपम् this form, विहाय abandoning, अथ thereafter, विरूपा disfigured shape, विकृतानना hideous countenance, पुरुषादी becoming a cannibal, महायक्षी great yakshi, ते to you, दारुणं रूपम् अस्तु let it be a terrible form. 
1::25::12::शापकृतामर्षा enraged at the curse, सा एषा ताटका this same Tataka, क्रोधमूर्छिता has become senseless with anger, अगस्त्यचरितम् place tread over by Agstya, शुभम् sacred, एनं देशम् this land, उत्सादयति is destroying.
1::25::13::राघव (राम) O Rama, दुर्वृत्ताम् wicked, परमदारुणाम् highly cruel, दुष्टपराक्रमाम् having vile prowess, एनां यक्षीम् this yakshi, गोब्राह्मणहितार्थाय for the welfare of brahmins and the cows, जहि you may slay her.
1::25::14::रघुनन्दन O Rama, शापसम्स्पृष्टाम् maligned by the curse, एनाम् this yakshini, निहन्तुम् to slay, त्वां ऋते except you, कश्चित् पुमान् a single man, त्रिषु लोकेषु in three worlds, न उत्सहते हि not inclined.  
1::25::15::नरोत्तम O Best among men, स्त्रीवधकृते by the act of slaying a woman, ते to you, घृणा pity न कार्या need not be shown, राजसूनुना by a prince, चातुर्वर्ण्यहितार्थाय in the interests four orders of the society, कर्तव्यम् should be done.
1::25::16::रक्षता while protecting, सता by a virtuous man, प्रजारक्षणकारणात् for the welfare of the subjects, नृशंसं वा either cruel, अनृशंसं वा or not cruel ,पातकं वा or a sin, सदोषं वा or involving a mistake, कर्तव्यम् should be done.
1::25::17::राज्यभारनियुक्तानाम् for those who enjoined by the burden of royalty, एष: this one, सनातन: eternal, धर्म: law, काकुत्स्थ O Kakusthsa, अधर्म्याम् unjust (Tataka ), जहि kill her, अस्या: for this Tataka, धर्म: righteousness, न विद्यते हि knows not.
1::25::18::नृप O Prince, पुरा in the days of the past, पृथिवीम् this earth, हन्तुम् to destroy, इच्छन्तीम् intending, विरोचनसुताम् daughter of Virochana, मन्थराम् Manthara, शक्र: Indra, अभ्यसूदयत् slew, श्रूयते हि it is heard.
1::25::19::राम O Rama, पुरा in the olden days, लोकम् this world, अनिन्द्रम् devoid of Indra, इच्छन्ती desirous, दृढव्रता determined to vow, काव्यमाता mother of Kavya, भृगुपत्नी अपि wife of sage Bhrigu, विष्णुनाऽपि by Visnu also, निषूदिता destroyed. 
1::25::20::राजपुत्र O Prince, महात्मभि: magnanimous, एतैश्च by them, अन्यै:च by others, पुरुषसत्तमै: by the best among men, बहुभिः by several, अधर्मसहिता: unrighteous ones, नार्य: women, हता: were killed.
