1::41::1::रघुनन्दन O Rama, सगरो राजा king Sagara, पुत्रान् sons, चिरगतान् having gone for a long time, ज्ञात्वा realising, स्वतेजसा by his own lusture, दीप्यमानम् resplendent, नप्तारम् addressing grand son, अब्रवीत् said:          
1::41::2::शूरश्च valiant, कृतविद्यश्च acquired knowledge in various fields, तेजसा by lustre, पूर्वै: with your ancestors, तुल्य: असि you are equal, पितृ़णाम् your ancestors, गतिम् path, अन्विच्छ search, अश्व: horse, येन by whom, अपवाहित: is carried away.
1::41::3::अन्तर्भौमानि in the depths of earth, सत्त्वानि beings, वीर्यवन्ति possess prowess, महान्ति च are also mighty, त्वम् you, तेषाम् theirs, प्रतिघातार्थम् to destroy, सास्त्रम् with weapons, कार्मुकम् bow, गृह्णीष्व hold.    
1::41::4::त्वम् you, अभिवाद्यान् men who deserve to be honoured, अभिवाद्य after honouring, विघ्नकरान् those causing obstacles to sacrifice, हत्वा by killing, सिद्धार्थ: सन् having accomplished  the purpose, मम my, यज्ञस्य sacrifice's, पारग: you ensure completion of my sacrifice, निवर्तस्व come back. 
1::41::5::अंशुमान् Anshuman, महात्मना by the magnanimous, सगरेण Sagara, एवम् in this way, सम्यक् thoroughly, उक्त: spoken, धनु: bow, खड्गं च scimitar, आदाय taking, लघुविक्रम: rapid strides, जगाम had set out.
1::41::6::नरश्रेष्ठ O Best among men, स: he, राज्ञा by king, अभिचोदित: directed, महात्मभि: by the noble, पितृभि: uncles, अन्तर्भौमम् in the depths of earth, खातम् dug, मार्गम् path, प्रापद्यत followed. 
1::41::7::महातेजा: exceedingly valiant, दैत्यदानवरक्षोभि: daityas, danavas, rakshasas, पिशाचपतगोरगै: pisachas, birds and serpents, पूज्यमानम् worshipped by, दिशागजम् elephant of the quarter, अपश्यत beheld. 
1::41::8::स: he, तं प्रदक्षिणं कृत्वा having circumambulated that elephant, निरामयम् wellbeing, पृष्ट्वा चापि having enquired, पितृ़न् about the younger brothers of his father, वाजिहर्तारमेव च about the person who had stolen the sacrificial horse, परिपप्रच्छ enquired.
1::41::9::दिशागजस्तु elephant of the quarter, अंशुमत: Anshman's, तत् वचः those words, श्रुत्वा having listened to, प्रत्याह replied, आसमञ्ज O Son of Asamanjasa, Anshuman, त्वं you,  कृतार्थ: having gained the object, सहाश्व: with horse, श्रीघ्रम् soon, एष्यसि will go (back).
1::41::10::तस्य his (elephant's), तत् वचनम् those words, श्रुत्वा having listened to, सर्वानेव all of them,  दिशागजान् elephants of the quarters, यथाक्रमम् successively, यथान्यायम् with due respect, प्रष्टुम् to enquire, उपचक्रमे commenced.
1::41::11::वाक्यज्ञै: knowers of essence of words, वाक्यकोविदै: proficient in the application of words, सर्वै: by all, तै: दिशापालै: by those mighty elephants, पूजित: honoured, सहय: with the horse, गन्तासि इति you will go back, अभिचोदित: was directed.
1::41::12::तेषाम् their, तद्वचनम् those words, श्रुत्वा having heard, लघुविक्रम: with quick paces, तस्य his, पितर: younger brothers of his father, सागरा: sons of Sagara, यत्र where, भस्मराशीकृता: were reduced  into heaps of ashes, जगाम had gone.
1::41::13::तदा then, स: he, असमञ्जसुत: son of Asamanjasa, दु:खवशम् possessed by grief, आपन्न: having reached, परमार्त: greatly distressed, तेषाम् their, वधात् by destruction, सुदु:खित: greatly grieved, चुक्रोश cried out.
1::41::14::दु:खशोकसमन्वित: possessed by grief and sorrow, पुरुषव्याघ्र: that tiger like brave one among men, अविदूरत: nearby, चरन्तम् grazing, यज्ञीयम् sacrificial, हयम् horse, ददर्श beheld.
1::41::15::महातेजा: highly lustrous, स: he, तेषाम् for those, राजपुत्राणाम् princes, जलक्रियाम् presenting  libations of waters (to the manes of the deceased), कर्तुकाम: with intention of doing, सलिलार्थी seeking water, जलाशयम् reservoir of water, न च अपश्यत् could not see.   
1::41::16::राम O Rama, तत: afterwards, निपुणाम् intelligent, दृष्टिम् glances, विसार्य extending, पितृ़णाम्  uncles', मातुलम् maternal uncle, खगाधिपम् lord of the eagles, अनिलोपमम् resembling wind in swiftness, सुपर्णम् Garuda (brother of Suparna, the mother of princes), अपश्यत् beheld.
1::41::17::महाबल: highly powerful, स: वैनतेय: Garuda, son of Vinata, (एनम् addressing him), वाक्यम् words, एवं thus, अब्रवीत् said, पुरुषव्याघ्र O Tiger among men, मा शुच: do not grieve, अयं वध: this act of assasination, लोकसम्मत: is aimed for the welfare of the three worlds.
1::41::18::महाबला: highly valiant, इमे these, अप्रमेयेन by one who has boundless power, कपिलेन by Kapila, दग्धा: हि have been burnt indeed, प्राज्ञ O Sagacious one, लौकिकम् worldly (ordinary), सलिलम् water, दातुम् to offer, नार्हसि is not proper on your part.
1::41::19::पुरुषर्षभ O Best among men, हिमवत: Himavan's, ज्येष्ठा eldest daughter, गङ्गा Ganga, महाबाहो O Mighty armed one, पितृ़णाम् yours uncles', जलक्रियाम् traditional rites with water, तस्याम्  in her (those waters), कुरु perform.
1::41::20::लोकपावनी purifier of the three worlds, that Ganga, भस्मराशीकृतान् reduced to heaps of ash, एतान् these, प्लावयेत् will sanctify, लोककान्तया by the beloved one of the world, तया गङ्गया by that Ganga, क्लिन्नम् inundated, इदं भस्म these heaps of ash, षष्टिं पुत्रसहस्राणि sixty thousand sons, स्वर्गलोकम् heavens च नेष्यति will take also. 
1::41::21::महाभाग O Highly fortunate one, पुरुषर्षभ O Best among men, तम् अश्वम् that horse, गृह्य taking, गच्छ go back, वीर O hero, पैतामहम् grand father's, यज्ञम् sacrifice, संवर्तयितुम् to  complete, अर्हसि it behoves of you.
1::41::22::अतिवीर्यवान् exceedingly powerful, महायशा: highly renowned, अंशुमान् Anshuman, सुपर्णवचनम् words of Suparna, श्रुत्वा having heard, त्वरितम् quickly, हयम् horse, आदाय taking hold of, पुन: again, आयात् returned. 
1::41::23::रघुनन्दन O Rama, दीक्षितम् one who is initiated into ceremony, राजानम् king, आसाद्य having reached, यथावृत्तम् in conformity with what had happened, तथा faithfully, सुपर्णवचनम् words of Suparna, न्यवेदयत् communicated.
1::41::24::नृप: king, अंशुमत: Anshuman's, घोरसङ्काशम् aweful, वाक्यम् words, श्रुत्वा having heard, यथाकल्पम् in accordance with rules of Kalpa, the vedanga, यथाविधि in accordance with the scriptures and tradition, यज्ञम् sacrifice ,निवर्तयामास performed.  
1::41::25::श्रीमान् auspicious, महीपति: lord of earth, king Sagara, इष्टयज्ञ: had completed the performance of the sacrifice, स्वपुरम् to his own capital, आगमत् reached, राजा king, गङ्गाया: Ganga, आगमे in the matter of descent, निश्चयम् decision, नाध्यगच्छत did not arrive (at any).
1::41::26::महान् mighty, राजा king, महता कालेन for a long time, निश्चयं अकृत्वा without arriving at any decision (in the matter of bringing Ganga down to earth), त्रिंशद्वर्षसहस्राणि thirty thousand years, राज्यम् kingdom, कृत्वा having ruled, दिवं गत: ascended heaven.  
