1::21::1::Out of affection towards his son, his (king Dasaratha's) plea to Viswamitra was full of contradiction. And on hearing the king, enraged Viswamitra replied:
1::21::2::
1::21::3::O king, if this act of yours is appropriate to you, I will go back (to the places) where from I came. O scion of the race of kakutstha, you have proved false to your promise. Live happily with your relatives.                                                     
1::21::4:: At the sight of the wise sage Viswamitra seized of wrath, the entire earth shook and  devatas were gripped in fear.
1::21::5::Great Vasishta, an adherent of ascetic practices and steadfast (to duty), seeing that the entire world frightened addressed the king, saying:  
1::21::6::Born in the line of Ikshvaku, you are a veritable the second god of righteousness, firm adherent of vows auspicious and virtuous. It is not right on your part to abandon your promise.
1::21::7:: O Dasaratha you are reputed in the three worlds as righteousminded. Do your own duty. Do not follow an unjust act which is unworthy of respect.
1::21::8::O Dasaratha, a promise made and not kept amounts to destruction of merits earned through previous pieties. Therefore send Rama (with him).
1::21::9::Trained or not in the use of arms, as long as Rama is protected by Viswamitra, just as nectar is protected by the flaming firegod rakshasas will not be able to compete with him.
1::21::10::This (Viswamitra) is an embodiment of righteousness and unsurpassed among the powerful. None can excel him in intellect in this world. He is the supreme refuge in austerity.
1::21::11::This Viswamitra knows the use of various kinds of weapons which no one knows among the animate and the inanimate in the three worlds. Nor will any one even know in future.
1::21::12::No gods nor sages nor asuras in rakshasas nor kinnaras nor mighty serpents nor gandharvas nor the best of yakshas (will be able to know)
1::21::13::All these weapons were given to Viswamitra by Bhrisasva's highly virtuous sons while he was ruling the kingdom.
1::21::14::Grandsons (daughter's sons) of Prajapati, they (these weapons) are in diverse forms, highly energetic and full of glory they bring victory.
1::21::15::Jaya and Suprabha of slender waists are the two daughters of Daksha. They gave  birth to one hundred effulgent sons known as astras and shastras.
1::21::16::Formerly Jaya, for the destruction of the army of asuras gave birth to fifty sons by virtue of a boon. They  possess immeasurable power of changing forms at will.
1::21::17::Suprabha gave birth to another fifty sons named Samharas who are unassailable,  invincible and more powerful. 
1::21::18::Viswamitra is well conversant with these weapons. Being virtuous, he is capable of creating new weapons also. 
1::21::19::Such is the prowess of Viswamitra who is a highly effulgent and highly renowned  sage. O King in sending Rama, you need not entertain any doubt.  
1::21::20::Son of Kusika, even though capable of repressing those rakhsasas by himself, it is for the welfare of your son that he is here requesting you to spare him.
1::21::21::Satisfied in his mind at the words of the sage (Vasishta), the full one among the Raghus' (Dasaratha) one with wide reputation, his frame shining gave his cheerful consent to the son of Kusika for Rama's departure.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकविंशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the twentyfirst sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
