1::22::1::वसिष्ठे when Vasistha, तथा in that manner, ब्रुवति having said, राजा the king,  दशरथ: Dasaratha, प्रहृष्टवदन: with cheerful countenance, स्वयम् himself, सलक्ष्मणम् along with Lakshmana, रामम् Rama, आजुहाव summoned.
1::22::2::स: दशरथ: राजा that king Dasaratha, मात्रा by mother, पित्रा दशरथेन च by father Dasaratha (by himself), कृतस्वस्त्ययनम् giving farewell by recitation of mantras for securing prosperity and averting evils, पुरोधसा वसिष्ठेन by priest Vasishta, मङ्गलै: by auspicious, अभिमन्त्रितम् making sacred by recitation of special mantras, प्रियम् पुत्रम् affectionate son, मूर्ध्नि on the forehead, उपाघ्राय having kissed, सुप्रीतेन with a pleased, अन्तरात्मना heart, कुशिकपुत्राय for kusika's son, ददौ delivered Rama (to the care of Viswamitra).
1::22::3::तत: then, राजीवलोचनम् lotuseyed, रामम् Rama, विश्वामित्रगतम् going with Visvamitra, दृष्ट्वा havingseen, तदा then, वायु: wind, सुखस्पर्श: with agreeable touch, नीरजस्क: without pollen, ववौ breezed.
1::22::4::महात्मनि glorious Visvamitra, प्रयाते तु when he had departed, महती incessant, पुष्पवृष्टि: showers of flowers, देवदुन्दुभिनिस्वनै: with the sounds of celestial drums, शङ्खदुन्दुभिनिर्घोष: आसीत् sounds of blowing conches and beating drums arose.
1::22::5::विश्वामित्र: Viswamitra, अग्रे in the forefront, ययौ walked, तत: behind him, धनुर्धर: with bow in his hand, राम: Rama (followed), काकपक्षधर: having side locks of hair, धन्वी an archer, सौमित्रि: Sumitra's son Lakshmana, तम् अन्वगात् followed him.
1::22::6::कलापिनौ equipped with quivers, धनुष्पाणी the twain with bows in their hands, दश दिश: in ten cardinal points, शोभमानौ illuminating, अक्षुद्रौ warriors of not a little prowess and splendour, त्रिशीर्षौ three hooded, पन्नगौ इव resembling two serpents, महात्मानम् magnanimous, विश्वामित्रम् Visvamitra, अश्विनौ twin Aswini devatas, पितामहमिव like Brahma, अनुजग्मतु: followed.
1::22::7::तदा then, धनुष्पाणी bows in their hands, स्वलङ्कृतौ wellattired, बद्धगोधाङ्गुलित्राणौ their left arms covered by leather to protect from bowstring and fingers encased in Gauna skin, खड्गवन्तौ armed with scimitars, महाद्युती resplendent, कुमारौ youthful beings, चारुवपुषौ having elegent physique, श्रिया with lustre, दीप्तौ radiating, अनिन्दितौ faultless, भ्रातरौ brothers, रामलक्ष्मणौ Rama and Lakshmana, अनुयातौ following the sage, पावकी born to firegod, कुमारौ sons Skanda and Visakhu, अचिन्त्यम् incomprehensible, देवम् god, स्थाणुम् इव like Iswara, कुशिकपुत्रम् son of Kausika, शोभयेताम् cast their radiance.
1::22::8::अध्यर्धयोजनम् more than a half Yojana, गत्वा having travelled, सरय्वा: river Sarayu, दक्षिणे तटे on southern bank, वश्वामित्र: Viswamitra, राम इति addressing him as O Rama, मधुराम् sweet, वाणीम् words, अभ्यभाषत spoke.
1::22::9::वत्स O Child, सलिलम् water, गृहाण take into your hands, कालस्य पर्यय:माभूत् let  no delay occur, त्वम् you, मन्त्रग्रामम् collection of mantras, तथा and, बलाम् Bala, अतिबलां Atibala, गृहाण receive.
1::22::10::ते to you, श्रम:न neither fatigue, ज्वरो वा nor fever, रूपस्य विपर्यय: न nor change in appearance, सुप्तम् whether in sleep, प्रमत्तं वा or inattentive condition, नैरृता: rakshasas, न धर्षयिष्यन्ति cannot trouble you.
1::22::11::राम O Rama, बाह्वो: of your hands, वीर्ये in might, सदृश: parallel man, कश्चन anyone, पृथिव्याम् in this earth, नास्ति does not exist, त्रिषु in the three, लोकेषु worlds, तव सदृश: equal to you, न भवेत् does not exist.
1::22::12::अनघ O Sinless one, सौभाग्ये in auspiciouness, तव सम: equal to  you, लोके in this world, न none, दाक्षिण्ये in kindness, न none, ज्ञाने in wisdom, बुद्धिनिश्चये in decisionmaking, न  none, उत्तरे when a reply, प्रतिवक्तव्ये has to be given, न none.
1::22::13::एतद्विद्याद्वये when these two kinds of knowledge, लब्धे सति have been secured, ते सम: equal to you, नास्ति there will not be, न भविता nor going to be in future, बला Bala, अतिबला चैव Atibala also, सर्वज्ञानस्य for all kinds of knowledge, मातरौ mothers. 
1::22::14::नरोत्तम O Best among men, राघव Oborn in the line of Raghu, राम ORama,पथि on the way, बलाम् Bala, अतिबलां चैव Atibala, पठत: if recited, ते to you, क्षुत्पिपासे hunger or thirst, न भविष्येते will not get.
1::22::15::विद्याद्वयम् these two sciences, अधीयाने when pursued, त्वयि by you, अतुलम् unequalled, यशश्च fame, ककुत्स्थ ORama, born in the line Kakutstha, धार्मिक one who conforms to justice, तेजस्समन्विते both possessed of virtues, पितामहसुते two daughters of grand sire, Brahma, एते विद्ये these sciences, तव to you, प्रदातुम् conferring, त्वम् you, सदृश: fit person.
1::22::16::एते बहुगुणा: these many qualities, सर्वे all, कामम् verywell, त्वयि in you, अत्र in this matter, संशय: न no doubt, तपसा with asceticism, सम्भृते nourished, एते these two  sciences, बहुरूपे multiple forms, भविष्यत: will assume.
1::22::17::तत: thereafter, राम: Rama, जलम् water, स्पृष्ट्वा having touched, शुचि: got purified, प्रहृष्टवदन: with happy coutenance, भावितात्मन: one who has perceived the supreme soul, महर्षे: from maharshi, ते विद्ये those two sciences, प्रतिजग्राह received.
1::22::18::भूरिविक्रम: a highly valiant hero, राम: Rama, विद्यासमुदित: possessed of the knowledge of the two sciences, कुशिकात्मजे in the matter of Visvamitra, सर्वाणि all, गुरुकार्याणि services  to be rendered in relation to a preceptor, नियुज्य having performed, शरदि like in autumnal season, सहस्ररश्मि: (Sun) emitting thousand rays, भगवान् दिवाकर:इव  resembling Sungod, शुशुभे appeared resplendent, त्रय: the three men, तत्र there, सरय्वाम् on the bank of river Sarayu, ससुखम् with great comfort, तां रजनीम् that night, ऊषु: dwelt.
1::22::19::अनुचिते unaccustomed, तृणशयने on the bed of grass, सहोषिताभ्याम् by those two who slept together, कुशिकसुतवचोऽनुलालिताभ्याम् who were put in good humour by the gentle words of Visvamitra, दशरथनृपसूनुसत्तमाभ्याम् by the two eminent sons of Dasaratha (Rama and Lakshmana), सा विभावरी च that night also, सुखमिव as if with comfort, विबभौ occured to their mind.
