1::33::1::On hearing the words of sagacious Kusanabha, his hundred daughters touched his feet  with their heads and  said:
1::33::2::O king, the  allpervading Windgod, having taken recourse to foul means intended to outrage our modesty without and moral compunction.
1::33::3:: We have our father who is dear to us. Hence we do not have freedom to choose. You may ask our father if he is willing to give us (in marriage).  
1::33::4::As all of us were speaking thus, the sinful Windgod, disregarding our words repeatedly assaulted us.
1::33::5::The deeply religious and highly powerful king, having heard those words of his one hundred exceptional daughters, replied: 
1::33::6::O daughters you have done a great act of forgiveness of which only the tolerant are capable. By taking a united stand, you have protected the honour of my dynasty.
1::33::7::Whether for women or men forgiveness is an ornament. It is difficult even for gods. For you, daughters, to show it without any difference of opinion is especially hard.
1::33::8:: Forbearance is charity, forbearance is sacrifice, forbearance is truth, forbearance is glory and forbearance is virtue. O daughters, the universe is supported by forbearance.  
1::33::9::O Rama after sending away his daughters, the king endowed with the power of the celestials and wellversed in the art of counselling, consulted his ministers about a suitable person for marriage of his daughters at proper time and place.
1::33::10:: At that time a great and virtuous ascetic named Chuli living in celebacy was performing austerities in pursuit of the knowledge of Brahman.
1::33::11::When he was performing austerities, a nymph named Somada, daughter of Urmila, used to serve him. Prosperity to you
1::33::12::Somada rendered her services with devotion and humility. There she lived a religious life. In the might time her spiritual guide was satisfied with her services. 
1::33::13::When her services came to a fruition with the passage of time, maharshi Chuli, spoke to her: 'I am pleased with you. What favour shall I do for you? May you be prosperous'
1::33::14::Having perceived that the sage was satisfied, the gandharva who was skilled in speech said exceedingly delighted to the sage in a sweet voice.
1::33::15::Bestowed with the great asceticism and brilliance of a brahmin, you look like Brahma. O righteous one, I desire a son endowed with the ascetic virtues of a brahmin.
1::33::16:: I am without a husband, my sire. I am not a wife to any one. Since I have taken refuge in you, you are competent to bestow on me a son with the power of your penance.
1::33::17::Pleased with her, brahmarshi Chuli gave her an excellent son to be wellknown as Brahmadatta born through the will of his mind.
1::33::18::Then king Brahmadatta, son of Somada, lived in the city of Kampilya with great prosperity like Indra in heaven.
1::33::19::O Rama, then the highly righteous king Kusanabha decided to give his hundred daughters to Brahmadatta. 
1::33::20::The lord of the earth, highly powerful king Kusanabha invited Brahmadatta, and gave his hundred daughters in marriage to him with a heart highly pleased.
1::33::21:: O son of Raghu's dynasty that king Brahmadatta resembling Indra received the hands of those maidens' in due order.
1::33::22::Thereafter, with the mere touch of his hand, the hundred daughters were cured of their hump back and freed from anguish. They assumed great beauty.
1::33::23::King Kusanabha, having seen his daughters released from disfigurement caused by  the Windgod was immensely pleased. He experienced waves of delight.
1::33::24::Then the king along with his queens performed the marriage of his daughters in the assembly of priests and sent them with Brahmadatta (to his kingdom).
1::33::25::Somada the gandharvi was exeedingly delighted with her daughtersinlaw and praised her son for his right action.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डेण्डे त्रयस्त्रिंशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the thirtythird sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
