1::3::1::धर्मात्मा the righteous one, धर्मसंहितम् is endowed with righteousness, समग्रम् entire, तत् वस्तु that story of Rama, श्रुत्वा having heard from Narada, धीमत: of the intellectual, तस्य वृत्तम् history of Rama, यत् which, व्यक्तम् distinctly, भूय: still more, अन्वेषते searched for.
1::3::2::मुनि: Valmiki, उदकम् water, उपस्पृश्य having performed achamana (sipping water in accordance with tradition to purify oneself), प्राचीनाग्रेषु with their ends facing the east side of, दर्भेषु kusha grass, स्थित्वा sitting, कृताञ्जलि: with folded palms, धर्मेण with the power of penance, गतिम् the course of past events in history of Rama, सम्यक् completely, अन्वेषते searched for.
1::3::3::रामलक्ष्मणसीताभि: by Rama, Lakshmana and Sita, राज्ञा दशरथेन च by king Dasaratha also, सभार्येण by his wives around him, सराष्ट्रेण along with his kingdom, यत् whatever, प्राप्तम् was obtained, तत्र in that matter, या गति: whatever course of events, यत् चेष्टितम् whatever were the endeavours made, हसितम् their laughter, भाषितं चैव their conversation, तत्सर्वम् all that, तत्त्वत: as in real life, यथावत् accurately, धर्मवीर्येण through the power of his penance, सम्प्रपश्यति visualised (clearly with his mind's eye).
1::3::4::स्त्रीतृतीयेन with his wife as a third member, वने चरता while moving in the (Dandakaranya) forest, सत्यसन्धेन bound by truth, रामेण by Rama, तदा then, यत् प्राप्तम् which was acquired, तत् सर्वम् all that, अन्ववेक्षितम् was visualised.
1::3::5::तत: thereafter, धर्मात्मा righteous Valmiki, योगम् spiritual meditation (yoga), आस्थित: having be taken himself,  पुरा past, तत्र there, यत् all that, निर्वृत्तम् happened, तत् that, सर्वम् clearly, पाणौ in the palm of the hand, आमलकं यथा like an amalaka fruit, पश्यति saw.
1::3::6::महाद्युति: highly resplendent, स: that Valmiki, तत् सर्वम् all that history, तत्त्वत: truely,  धर्मेण with the power of righteousness, दृष्ट्वा having seen, कामार्थगुणसंयुक्तम् blended with merits of attainment of worldly prosperity and pleasures, धर्मार्थगुणविस्तरम् detailed description of the merit of righteousness (as an end and aim), रत्नाढ्यम् filled with  gems, समुद्रमिव like an  ocean, सर्वश्रुतिमनोहरम् captivating the ears and mind, अभिरामस्य delightful, रामस्य of Rama, चरितम् history, कर्तुम् to compose, उद्यत: got ready.
1::3::7::भगवान् divine sage , स:ऋषि: that sage, नारदेन महर्षिणा by the illustrious sage Narada, पूर्वम् in the past, यथा in the form, कथितम् as related, रघुवंशस्य born in the race of Raghu, चरितम् history, चकार composed. 
1::3::8::रामस्य जन्म birth of Rama, सुमहत् very great, वीर्यम् prowess, सर्वानुकूलताम् benevolence to all, लोकस्य to the world, प्रियताम् being beloved, क्षान्तिम् forbearance, सौम्यताम् handsome  looks, सत्यशीलताम् the truthful character.
1::3::9::विश्वामित्रसमागमे his association with Visvamitra, अन्या: other, नाना चित्रकथा: several astonishing and varied  stories, जानक्या: with Janaki, विवाहं च marriage, धनुष: of great bow, विभेदनम् breaking of.
1::3::10::रामरामविवादं च altercation between Rama and Parasurama, तथा and, दाशरथे: Rama's, गुणान् noble qualities, तथा and, रामस्य Rama's, अभिषेकम् coronation, कैकेय्या: Kaikeyi's, दुष्टभावताम् wicked nature.
1::3::11::अभिषेकस्य for the coronation of Rama, विघातं च obstacles, रामस्य च Rama's, विवासनम् departure to the forest, राज्ञ: king Dasaratha's, शोकविलापं wailings with sorrow,  परलोकस्य heaven, आश्रयं च taking refuge.
1::3::12::प्रकृतीनाम् of the people of Ayodhya, विषादं च and the grief, प्रकृतीनाम् of the people, विसर्जनम् abandoning them, निषादाधिपसंवादम् the conversation with Guha, the ruler of Nishadas, तथा and, सूतोपावर्तनम् charioteer Sumantra's return.
1::3::13::गङ्गाया: the river Ganga, सन्तारं च अपि ferrying, भरद्वाजस्य Bharadwaja's, दर्शनम् audience, भरद्वाजाभ्यनुज्ञानात् by the order of sage Bharadwaja, चित्रकूटस्य Chitrakuta mountain's, दर्शनम् seeing.  
1::3::14::वास्तुकर्म construction of a hut, निवेशं च dwelling in that hut, भरतागमनम् arrival of Bharata, रामस्य Rama's, प्रसादनं च propitiating, तथा and, पितु: his father's, सलिलक्रियाम् funeral rites.
1::3::15::पादुकाग्र्याभिषेकं च installation of sandals of Rama, नन्दिग्रामनिवासनम् dwelling of Bharata at Nandigrama, दण्डकारण्यगमनम् arrival of Rama to Dandakaranya, तथा and, विराधस्य  Viradha's, वधम् slaying.
1::3::16::शरभङ्गस्य sage Sarabhanga's, दर्शनम् meeting, सुतीक्ष्णेन with Sutikshna, समागमम् meeting, अनसूयासहास्याम् अपि companionship with Anasuya, अङ्गरागस्य fragrant  unguents to the body, अर्पणम् च application.
1::3::17::अगस्त्यदर्शनं चैव Rama's interview with sage Agastya, जटायो: Jatayu, अभिसङ्गमम् meeting, पञ्चवट्या: गमनम् departure to Panchavati, शूर्पणख्या: Surpanakha's, दर्शनम् च appearance .
1::3::18::शूर्पणख्या: Surpanakha's, संवादम् dialogue, तथा and, विरूपकरणम् her disfigurement, खरत्रिशिरसो: of Khara and Trisiras, वधम् slaughter, रावणस्य Ravana's, उत्थानम् च rise  (beginning  of efforts).
1::3::19::मारीचस्य Maricha's, वधं चैव slaying, तथा and, वैदेह्या: Sita's, हरणम् abduction, राघवस्य Rama's, विलापं च lamentation, गृध्रराजनिबर्हणम् killing of Jatayu, the king of vultures. 
1::3::20::कबन्धदर्शनं चापि seeing of Kabandha, पम्पायाश्चापि of Pampa also, दर्शनम् viewing of, शबर्या: Sabari's, दर्शनं चैव meeting also, तथा and, हनूमद्दर्शनम् meeting with Hanuman. 
1::3::21::ऋश्यमूकस्य Rishyamuka mountain's, गमनम् departure, सुग्रीवेण with Sugriva, समागमम् meeting, प्रत्ययोत्पादनम् bringing about conviction, सख्यम् friendship, वालिसुग्रीवविग्रहम् combat between Sugriva and Vali.
1::3::22::वालिप्रमथनं चैव crushing of Vali by Rama, सुग्रीवप्रतिपादनम् proposal (installation) of Sugriva, ताराविलापम् mourning of Tara, समयम् agreement (waiting for the search of Sita as per the pact of friendship between Rama and Sugriva), वर्षरात्रनिवासनम् sojourn on the mountain during rainy season.
1::3::23::राघवसिंहस्य of the lion in the race of Raghus, कोपम् anger, बलानाम् of monkey forces, उपसङ्ग्रहम् consolidation of, दिश: in different directions, प्रस्थापनं चैव despatch also, पृथिव्या: (to different places) earth's, निवेदनम् report. 
1::3::24::अङ्गुलीयकदानं च the delivery of the ring (to Hanuman by Rama), ऋक्षस्य बिलदर्शनम् the entry into the cave of Riksha, प्रायोपवेशनं चापि fasting unto death, सम्पाते: with Sampati, दर्शनं चापि interview.
1::3::25::पर्वतारोहणं चापि scaling of (Mahendra) mountain, सागरस्य Ocean's, लङ्घनम् traversing, समुद्रवचनात् following the words of the lord of ocean, मैनाकस्य दर्शनम् appearance of Mainaka.
1::3::26::सिंहिकाया: Simhika's, निधनम् death, लङ्कामलयदर्शनम् viewing a mountain in Lanka, रात्रौ by night, लङ्काप्रवेशं च entry into Lanka, अथ thereafter, एकस्य lonely Hanuman's, विचिन्तनम् thinking.   
1::3::27::रावणस्य Ravana's, दर्शनमपि viewing of, पुष्पकस्य aerial chariot, Pushpaka's दर्शनम् viewing of, आपानभूमिगमनम् reaching the hall where liquors are consumed, अवरोधस्य womens' apartments in the royal palace, दर्शनम् sight of.
1::3::28::अशोकवनिकायानम् entry into Ashoka garden, सीताया: Sita's, दर्शनं चापि meeting, अभिज्ञानप्रदानम् च presentation  of ring as a token of recognition, रावणस्य Ravana's, दर्शनं च meeting also.
1::3::29::राक्षसीतर्जनं चैव threatenings of female demons, त्रिजटास्वप्नदर्शनम् narration of dream by Trijata, मणिप्रदानम् presentation of chudamani, सीताया: Sita's, तथैव च and also, वृक्षभङ्गम् breaking  of trees. 
1::3::30::राक्षसीविद्रवं चैव flight of female demons, किङ्कराणाम् servants (of Ravana), निबर्हणम् killing, वायुसूनो: of the son of windgod, Hanuman, ग्रहणम् seizure, लङ्कादाहाभिगर्जनम् burning down of Lanka by Hanuman with ferocious roaring.
1::3::31::अथ thereafter, प्रतिप्लवनम् bounding back the ocean, तथा also, मधून्तां Madhu forest, हरणम् forcibly seizing, राघवाश्वासनं चापि consoling of Raghava, तथा also, मणिनिर्यातनम् delivering the gem. 
1::3::32:: समुद्रेण with the lord of the seas, सङ्गमम् meeting, नलसेतो: बन्धनं च construction of bridge by Nala, समुद्रस्य ocean's, प्रतारं च crossing, रात्रौ during night, लङ्कावरोधनम् seige of Lanka.
1::3::33::विभीषणेन with Vibhishana, संसर्गम् association, वधोपायनिवेदनम् disclosure of means of destruction of Ravana, कुम्भकर्णस्य निधनम् death of Kumbhakarna, मेघनादनिबर्हणम् killing of Meghanada.
1::3::34::रावणस्य Ravana's, विनाशं destruction, सीतावाप्तिम् recovery (reunion) of Sita, अरे: पुरे in the enemy city of Lanka, विभीषणाभिषेकं च coronation of Vibhishana,  पुष्पकस्य दर्शनं च sight  of Pushpaka.
1::3::35::अयोध्याया:गमनम् going to Ayodhya, भरतेन with Bharata, समागमम् reunion, रामाभिषेकाभ्युदयम् festive occasion of the coronation of Rama, सर्वसैन्यविसर्जनम् sending away the entire (monkey)forces, स्वराष्ट्ररञ्जनम् keeping his subjects delighted, वैदेह्या:विसर्जनम् च deserting Sita (in the forest).
1::3::36::भगवान् divine, वाल्मीकि:ऋषि: sage Valmiki, रामस्य Rama's, यत्किञ्चित् which ever matter, वसुधातले on the earth, अनागतं च events yet to happen, तत् that, उत्तरे in Uttara, काव्ये kanda, चकार composed.
