1::6::1::From that city of Ayodhya, king Dasaratha ruled the entire world, following the tradition of Manu who was a highly powerful protector of the people. Dasaratha was well versed in the Vedas. He commanded all resources. Farsighted, he possessed great prowess. He was dear to the inhabitants of towns and villages. Among Ikshvaku kings, he was a great charioteer capable of fighting with many maharathas singlehanded. He performed many sacrifices and was devoted to the practice of dharma. He was in full control over his subjects. He was a great sage, a royal saint and renowned in the three worlds (Bhooloka, Bhuvarloka and Suvarloka). He was mighty. He was a destroyer of enemies. He had scores of good friends. He had perfect control over his senses. In riches, he was comparable to Indra and Kubera. 
1::6::2::King Dasaratha, who always kept his word and followed dharma, attained prosperity and pleasure in equal measure by righteous means ruled that best of the cities as Indra ruled Amaravati.
1::6::3::The people living in that excellent city were happy, virtuous, wellread (in the Vedas and the sastras) and content with the possessions of their own. They were free from avarice. And always spoke the truth.
1::6::4::In that best of cities, there was not even a single householder who had not adequate wealth or who had not achieved dharma, artha and kama or who did not possess the wealth of foodgrains, cattle and horses.
1::6::5::The lustful, the miserly, the unscholarly and atheists were not to be seen anywhere in the city of Ayodhya.
1::6::6::All men and women (in the city) were of righteous conduct, fully selfcontrolled and prosperous with good conduct and behaviour. They were pure like maharshis. 
1::6::7::In the city, there was none without earornaments, without coronet, without wearing garlands and none unclean. And none without the anointment of fragrants on the body.
1::6::8::(In the city of Ayodhya) there was no one who did not eat food to full satisfaction and was not charitable. None was found without wearing ornaments on the hands and bracelets on the upper arms and around the neck. Also no one could be seen who had not restrained his passions and emotions.
1::6::9::In the city of Ayodhya there was none who did not kindle the sacrificial fire. There was none who did not perform a sacrifice. There were no thieves or meanminded persons or persons of improper descent of mixed castes.
1::6::10::The brahmins were always interested in the performance of their duties. They had control over their senses. They were charitable and studious. They were selfcontrolled  while accepting charity and maintaining marital relations.
1::6::11::That time there was no atheist, no liar and none ignorant of the sastras. There was no one who was jealous, incompetent or illiterate.
1::6::12::There was no brahmin who was not well versed in the Vedangas or who did not perform religious vows. There was not even one  who would not donate in thousands. There was no one distracted or depressed.
1::6::13::In Ayodhya, there was no man or woman who was not endowed with wealth or beauty. It was not possible to see any one who had no devotion for the king. 
1::6::14::There in Ayodhya the best of cities, the first of the four castes (brahmins) used to worship gods and guests. They had the sense of gratitude. They were munificient, heroic and possessed prowess. They lived long. They were righteous and truthful. And they lived together with their sons, grandsons and wives.
1::6::15::The kshatriyas were obedient to brahmins and vaisyas followed kshatriyas. Sudras assisted the three castes and all were fully occupied in their respective professions. 
1::6::16::That city was ably governed by Dasaratha, scion of the Ikshvakus, in the same way as it was  previously administered by (Manu), the foremost among men and and the most intelligent.
1::6::17::It abounded with warriors, like a cave with lions. They were almost like flaming fire, the most determined among experts and accomplished in learning (the science of arms).
1::6::18::The city was full of excellent horses born in the regions of Kambhoja, Bahlika, Vanayu and Sindhu, similar to that of Indra's horse (called Ucchaisrava).
1::6::19::It was full of intoxicated elephants born in Vindhya mountains, elephants of enormous strength looking like mountains and born in the Himalayas. Elephants of good breed hailing from the family of  Airavata (Indra's vehicle), Mahapadma, Anjana and Vamana.
1::6::20::The city (of Ayodhya) was always full of intoxicated elephants resembling mountains belonging to the races of Bhadra, Mandra, Mriga and interbreed of these three races, interbreed of races of Bhadra and Mandra, Bhadra and Mriga, Mriga and Mandra.
1::6::21::The city where king Dasaratha lived and ruled, spread over a distance of sixteen miles. And it was worthy of its name.
1::6::22::Mighty king Dasaratha, of great brilliance vanquished his foes and ruled the city like the Moon over the  stars.
1::6::23::The king who equalled Indra (in splendour) ruled the invincible city of Ayodhya true to its name with its strong gates and solid locks. It was adorned with wonderful edifices teeming with thousands of men. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे षष्ठस्सर्ग:।। Thus ends the sixth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana  the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
