1::64::1::O Rambha you must entice Viswamitra by lust and passion. This important work must be done by you in the interest of the gods. 
1::64::2::O Rama, to these words of the sagacious, thousandeyed Lord of the gods (Indra) that apsara with folded hands bashfully replied:
1::64::3:: 'Lord of the devatas this mighty ascetic Viswamitra is a terrible person. He will ceratinly release on his dreadful anger (curse me). O Lord this is my apprehension. You should excuse me'.
1::64::4::O Rama having heard Rambha trembling in fear and standing with folded palms, Indra spoke:
1::64::5::'O Rambha have no fear. Feel safe. Carry out my order. When the trees look so beautiful in spring I shall in captivating the form of a cuckoo, stay by your side in the company of Kamadeva (Cupid).
1::64::6:: O Rambha displaying many (romantic) gestures and assuming a fascinating form, distract the mighty ascetic, Kausika (Viswamitra)'.
1::64::7::At these words (of Indra), Rambha, assumed any form of excellent beauty and with a bright smile set out to allure Viswamitra.
1::64::8::Excited by the charming warble of the cuckoo, Viswamitra opened his eyes.
1::64::9::On hearing the sound of the incomparable song of the cuckoo along with the  sight of Rambha, a doubt arose in the mind of the ascetic.
1::64::10::Son of Kushika, the eminent ascetic knew it was the work of Indra. Seized with anger, he cursed Rambha: 
1::64::11::'O luckless Rambha, since you have endeavoured to distract me from my desire to conquer  wrath and passion, you shall turn into a rock and remain so for ten thousand years'.
1::64::12::'O Rambha an effulgent brahmin, endowed with the power of asceticism, will liberate you from this state into which you have fallen on account of my anger'. 
1::64::13:: The brilliant Viswamitra, the great ascetic, now experienced remorse for his inability to contain anger.
1::64::14::This mighty curse, of the great saint transformed Rambha into a rock and sent Kamadeva and Indra to their heels.
1::64::15::O Rama highly powerful Viswamitra was deprived of his ascetic merit due to his anger. He had no peace of mind for his inability to control his senses.
1::64::16::Having been deprived of his ascetic merit, he resolved not to lose his temper nor ever breathe a word.
1::64::17:: Further, I shall not even inhale for hundreds of years. I shall conquer my senses and dry up this body.
1::64::18::Until brahminhood is obtained by my austerities, I shall stay without breathing or eating for innumerable years. While performing penance, my limbs shall not undergo deterioration. 
1::64::19::O Descendant of Raghu in this way that eminent ascetic took an unprecedented vow to practise penance for a thousand years.   इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे चतुष्षष्टितमस्सर्ग:।। Thus ends the sixtyfourth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
