1::32::1::There was a great ascetic named Kusa, born to Brahma, as ascetic indefatigable in vows, knowldegeable in dharma and a respector of the virtuous.
1::32::2:: That great soul, Kusa, married the princess of Vidarbha  born in a noble family and a match for him. He begot four virtuous sons who resembled him. They were Kusamba, Kusanabha, Adhurtarajas and Vasu.
1::32::3::Kusa addressed his four brilliant sons who were highly enthusiastic, pious, truthful and were wedded to duties of the warrior race:
1::32::4:: O my sons, govern with righteousness so that you will acquire immense merit'. Hearing the words of the rishi, the four sons who were the best among men and revered in the world constructed four cities as their abodes.
1::32::5:: The brilliant Kushamba and the righteous Kushanabha constructed the cities of Kaushanbi and Mahodaya (as their capital) respectively.
1::32::6::O Rama king Adhurtarajasa constructed Dharmaranya, the best of cities and king Vasu, the city of Girivrajam.
1::32::7::O Rama this place where we are (called Vasumati) belongs to the magnanimous king Vasu. This is  surrounded by five great shining mountains.  
1::32::8::The delightful and renowned river Sumagadhi (known as Sona), flowing in the country of Magadha, looks beautiful like a garland amidst five great mountains.
1::32::9:: Rama, this Magadhi river, of great Vasu flows from the east surrounded by fertile crops fields like a garland. 
1::32::10::O scion of the Raghu family, the virtuous rajarshi Kusanabha begot one hundred beautiful daughters through a nymph named Ghritachi.
1::32::11:: Those welladorned, beautiful, young maidens in the pleasuregarden looked like lightnings in the rainy season. Bedecked with fine ornaments they were singing, dancing, playing on instruments and moving in all directions in great delight.
1::32::12::With beautiful limbs of unparalleled beauty on earth, they shone in the pleasuregarden like stars in the midst of clouds.
1::32::13:: At the sight of the maidens embellished with all virtues and youth and beauty, the allpervading Windgod addressed them these words:
1::32::14::I request you all to be my wives. You will leave this feeling of mortality and attain a long life.
1::32::15:: Youth is always unstable, especially in human beings. If you marry me, you will be ever youthful like devatas. 
1::32::16::At the works of the untiringly blowing Windgod the lunged maidens laughed and said:
1::32::17::O best among devatas you move within all living beings, we feel your impact. Why do you insult us?
1::32::18:: O best among devatas we are daughters of Kusanabha, We are capable of pulling you down from your position. We are safeguarding our ascetic merit as virgins (we could curse you to save our ascetic merit) of Kusnabha. 
1::32::19:: O wicked one, do not dishonour our father who always speaks the truth. He will choose the bridegrooms righteously. Do not invite death (father may be the cause of your death).
1::32::20::Our father is our lord. Our father is god to us. Whomsoever our father offers us shall become our husband.
1::32::21::Having heard the words of those maidens, the most powerful and venerable Windgod became furious. He entered all the limbs of their bodies, twisted and distorted them.
1::32::22::Their bodies disfigured and shattered by the Windgod, the maidens with tears flowing from their eyes entered the palace and fell down on the ground, agitated and overtaken by shame.
1::32::23::The king saw his extremely beautiful beloved daughters distressed and shattered and spoke these words with bewilderment.
1::32::24::O daughters What has happened? Who has dishonoured virtue? Say it at once. Who has made you hunchbacked? Standing roud me, why are you dumb? The king heaved a sigh and entered into a state of samadhi.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे द्वात्रिंशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the thirtysecond sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
