1::70::1::Thereafter at dawn after the maharshis had performed their daily (sacrificial) rites the eloquent Janaka said to the chief priest Satananda:
1::70::2::The extremely righteous, renowned and most brilliant Kusadhwaja, my younger brother is (at present) ruling the sacred kingdom of Sankasya, which is like the aerial chariot Pushpaka, with darts planted in water as boundary on the bank of the auspicious, sacred river Ikshumati.  
1::70::3::I desire to see Kusadhwaja who I have accepted as the protector of the sacrifice. I want that my glorious brother should share this pleasure, with me.
1::70::4::Janaka having said so in the presence of Satananda gave instructions to a few faithful  attendants who were present.
1::70::5::In obedience to the command of Indra among men (king Janaka), the messengers rode away on swift horses to bring king Kusadhwaja, a tiger among men just like fetching Visnu by the orders of Indra.
1::70::6::The messengers reached Sankasya, met Kusadhwaja and related to him what had happened. They informed him the intention of (king) Janaka.
1::70::7::Kusadhwaja having heard the events from the loyal, mighty messengers set out for Mithila in compliance with the request of the king (Janaka).
1::70::8::There he saw the highsouled Janaka devoted to righteousness. Having paid his regards to Satananda and the virtuous king he occupied an exalted seat befitting a king.
1::70::9::The two heroic brothers endowed with great splendour seated beside each other, despatched Sudamana the wisest of ministers (to Dasaratha).
1::70::10::O Foremost among counsellors, go speedily and bring along with his ministers and sons the invincible Dasaratha of the Ikshvakus dynasty whose splendour is immeasurable.
1::70::11::Having reached the tent, he (Sudamana) saw Dasaratha, perpetuator of the race of the Raghus and bowing down his head, said:
1::70::12::O Heroic lord of Ayodhya, Janaka, the lord of Mithila desires to see you along with preceptors and priest.
1::70::13::King Dasaratha on hearing the words of the best of the counsellors reached the place where Janaka was waiting with hosts of rishis and relations. 
1::70::14::The king (Dasaratha), skilled in speech, accompanied by counsellors and kins said to Janaka,the lord of the Videhas:
1::70::15::O Great king venerable Vasishta is the spiritual protector of the Ikshvakus race and it is known that for all ceremonies he is our spokesman.
1::70::16::Having been permitted by Viswamitra, along with all maharshis virtuous Vasishta will tell you in detail about my race.  
1::70::17::Having said this amidst the best of men and the most distinguished among kings, Dasaratha remained silent. Then Vasishta, the venerable sage, wellversed in speech spoke to the Lord of Videhas (Janaka) in the midst of priests.
1::70::18::From the unmanifest was born the eternal, the constant, the imperishable Brahma. To him was born Marichi and to Marichi, Kasyapa.
1::70::19::Kasyapa begot Vivasvan and Vivasvan, Manu. Ikshavaku was the son of Manu otherwise called Prajapati or Vaivasvata. 
1::70::20::It may be noted that Ikshvaku was the first ancestral king of Ayodhya whose son was the wellknown, glorious Kukshi.
1::70::21::Prosperous Vikukshi was Kukshi's son, who brought forth brilliant and powerful Bana.
1::70::22::Bana's son was the most brilliant and valiant Anaranya whose son Pruthu was succeeded by Trisanku.
1::70::23:: Trisanku's famous son was Dundumara also known as Yuvanashva whose son was king Mandhata.
1::70::24::Mandhata's son was prosperous Susandhi who brought forth two sons Dhruvasandhi and Prasenajit.
1::70::25::To Dhruvasandhi was born the wellknown Bharata who begot the vigorous Asita.
1::70::26::Valiant kings belonging to the races of the Haihayas, Talaiangha, and Sasibindus   became  the enemies to Asita.
1::70::27::The king Asita who was a weakling was defeated in the conflict against the kings and was exiled. Along with his counsellors he lived at on the Bhriguprasravana Himavat mountain.
1::70::28::It is said that his (Asita's) two wives were pregnant. One gave food mixed with poison to the other with the intention of destroying her embryo.
1::70::29::At that time Chyavana of the family of Bhrigu liked to stay at Himavat, the great, pleasant mountain.
1::70::30::That the lotuseyed and highly accomplished Kalindi, offered herself for a son to Chyavana who was glowing like a god.
1::70::31::Having approached the ascetic. Kalindi paid obeisance to him who said:
1::70::32::'O Great lady a child of high prowess, lustre and virtues is growing in your womb. In a short time this glorious son carrying with him the poison (administered to you) will be born. O Lotuseyed lady, do not grieve'.
1::70::33::This eldest queen who was a devoted wife, afflicted with sorrow due to loss of her husband  gave birth to a son by the grace of  Chyavana.
1::70::34::Since poison was given to her by  her rival queen with the intention of destroying the   embryo, the son was born with poison and so came to be known as Sagara.
1::70::35:: Asamanja was the son of Sagara and to him was born Anshuman. Dilipa was the son of Anshuman and father of Bhagiratha. 
1::70::36::Bhagiratha begot Kakustha whose son was Raghu. Powerful Pravriddha was Raghu's son. He became Purushadaka (cannibal), on the curse of Vasistha. He grasped water in order to retaliate Vasishta but was prevented by  his wife. The water fell on his feet and he came to be known as Kalmashapada (feet polluted with water). Samkhana was born to him.
1::70::37::Sudarsana was the son of Samkhana. His son was Agnivarna. To Agnivarna was  born Sighraga and to Sighraga, Maru. To Maru, was born Prasusruka and to Prasrusuka, Ambarisha.
1::70::38::King Nahusha was the son of  Ambarisha. To Nahusha was born Yayati whose son was Nabhaga.
1::70::39::Nabhaga's son was Aja. Aja was the father of Dasaratha and Dasaratha, the father of  Rama and Lakshmana.
1::70::40::Great among men, O King be gracious enough to give your equally accomplished two daughters in mariage to Rama and Lakshmana who are born in the family of Ikshvakus  kings possessing the purity of race right from the beginning. They are highly virtuous, heroic, and truthful. They have chosen your daughters as their brides.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे सप्ततितमस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the seventieth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
