1::46::1::O Rama Diti was afflicted with great grief when her sons were killed. She addressed   her husband Kasyapa, son of Maricha, saying:
1::46::2::O adorable one, your highly powerful sons, (devatas) have killed mine through extensive austerities. I am desirous of obtaining a (mighty) son capable of killing Indra. 
1::46::3::I shall practise austerities. You ought to grant me a son who would be the supreme ruler of the world and capable of killing Indra. You can say yes (if you will).
1::46::4::Then, Maricha's son, exceedingly bright Kasyapa on hearing the words of Diti who was deeply grieved replied:
1::46::5::O one vested with the wealth of austerities be it so. Prosperity to you Remain chaste, you will deliver a son who will kill Indra in the battle.
1::46::6::If you remain pure and clean, on completion of a thousand years you will give birth to a son through me who will be the lord of the three worlds.
1::46::7::Highly brilliant Kasyapa, having thus spoken, touched her gently with his palm, stroked her body and said, May good betide thee. Having said this, Kasyapa went away to perform austerities.
1::46::8::O foremost among men after Kasyapa had left, Diti exceedingly delighted (at the prospect of having sons) reached Kushaplavana, and practised intense mortifications.
1::46::9::O foremost of men great treasure of virtues while she was practising austerities, the thousandeyed Indra  began to serve her.
1::46::10::The thousandeyed Indra served her by providing fire, Kusha grass, sticks for burning, water, fruits, roots and all other things desired by her.
1::46::11:: Indra attended on Diti, stroking her limbs gently from time to time to help her regain their  suppleness and alleviate her fatigue.
1::46::12::O son of the Raghus ten years before completion of a thousand years. Diti, highly pleased with the services rendered by Indra, addressed him, saying:
1::46::13::O best of the gods your illustrious father granted me a boon for a son I sought on completion of a thousand years (of penance). 
1::46::14::O the best of the brave ten years is yet to go (for completion of austerities). You will  have a brother. May you prosper
1::46::15::O Child I'll create in him eagerness victory. Together with him you will gain victory over the three worlds. Relieved of sorrows, enjoy you'll with him.
1::46::16::After speaking thus to Indra, goddess Diti overpowered with sleep around midsday dropped off, her feet towards her head.
1::46::17::Indra laughed. He rejoiced at the sight of her ominous posture of sleeping with her feet towards her head and her hair falling on her feet.
1::46::18::O Rama with great courage Indra entered her womb and severed her embryo into  seven pieces. 
1::46::19::O Rama that embryo, being severed by Vajra having a hundred edges, cried at high pitch which awakened Diti.
1::46::20::Highly powerful Indra, even while saying to the crying embryo  Do not weep, Do not weep severed it.
1::46::21::Do not kill, Do not kill, said Diti. Subsequently Indra, in deference to the words of his mother, emerged out of the womb.
1::46::22::Armed with Vajra, Indra addressed Diti with folded palms, saying, O Devi you have slept,  with your head towards your feet and your hair falling on your feet.
1::46::23::I have seized the opportunity and severed into seven pieces the foetus who would have been a slayer of Indra. O Devi shoudn't you forgive me?इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे षट्चत्वारिंशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the fortysixth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
