1::59::1::उक्तवाक्यम् having the words spoken, साक्षात् evident to the senses, चण्डालरूपिणम् chandala form, राजानम् king, कृपया out of pity, कुशिकात्मज: Visvamitra, मधुरम् sweet, वाक्यम् words, अब्रवीत् spoken.
1::59::2::ऐक्ष्वाक O Descendant of Ikshvakus, वत्स child, स्वागतम् welcome, त्वाम् you, सुधार्मिकम् as highly righteous one, जानामि I know you, नृपपुङ्गव O Eminent among kings, माभैषी: fear not, ते to you, शरणम् refuge, भविष्यामि I shall become. 
1::59::3::अहम् I, पुण्यकर्मण: men of pious deeds, यज्ञसाह्यकरान् to assist in the sacrifice, सर्वान् all, महर्षीन् maharshis, आमन्त्रये I shall invite, निर्वृत: with relief, यक्ष्यसि you will perform the sacrifice.
1::59::4::गुरुशापकृतम् as a result of the curse of spiritual preceptor, यत् which, रूपम् form, त्वयि in you, वर्तते existing, अनेन by  this, रूपेण सह with form, सशरीर: with the physical body, गमिष्यसि you shall go.
1::59::5::नराधिप O King, य: such that, त्वम् you, शरण्यम् fit to take refuge in, कौशिकम् Visvamitra, आगम्य having reached, शरणागतः have taken refuge, तव for you, स्वर्गम् heaven, हस्तप्राप्तम्  already in your hand, मन्ये I consider.
1::59::6::महातेजा: most brilliant, एवम् thus, उक्त्वा having spoken, परमधार्मिकान् highly virtuous, महाप्राज्ञान् great intellectuals, पुत्रान् sons, यज्ञसम्भारकारणात् to make preparations for sacrifice, व्यादिदेश ordered.
1::59::7::सर्वान् all, शिष्यान् disciples, समाहूय having summoned, एतत् this, वाक्यम् word, उवाच च said, वत्सा: O Children, मम my, आज्ञया with the order, सशिष्यसुहृदश्चैव with their disciples and friends, सर्त्विज: with the officiating priests, सुबहुश्रुतान् welllearned persons, सर्वानृषिगणान् hosts of rishis, आनयध्वम् you may bring them.  
1::59::8::अन्य: any other one, मद्वाक्यबलचोदित: incited by the strength of my words, यत् which , वचनम् word, ब्रूयातथ may speak, अखिलेन entirely, उक्तम् spoken, अनादृतम् with disrespect, तत् सर्वम् all that, मम to me, अख्येयम् should be reported.
1::59::9::तस्य his, तत् वचनम् that word, श्रुत्वा having listened, तदाज्ञया by his order, दिश: in different directions, जग्मु: went, अथ thereafter, सर्वेभ्य: from all, देशेभ्य: countries, ब्रह्मवादिन: expounders of veda, आजग्मु: arrived.
1::59::10::ते शिष्या: those disciples, सर्वे all, समागम्य having returned, ज्वलिततेजसम् shining with splendour, मुनिम् sage visvamitra, सर्वेषाम् of all, ब्रह्मवादिनाम् of the expounders of veda, वचनम् words, ऊचुश्च told.
1::59::11::ते your, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा having heard, सर्वे all, द्विजातय: brahmins, समायान्ति are coming, महोदयं वर्जयित्वा except mahodaya, सर्वदेशेषु from all countries, आगच्छन् have arrived.
1::59::12::मुनिपुङ्गव O Preeminent among ascetics, सर्वम् all, तत् शतम् वासिष्ठम् that hundred sons of Vasishta, क्रोधपर्याकुलाक्षरम् speech confused with anger, यत् which, वचनम् word, आह have spoken, सर्वम् all that, त्वम् you, शृणु listen.
1::59::13::यस्य for whom, क्षत्रिय: kshatriya, याजक: priest of the sacrifice, विशेषत: particularly, चण्डालस्य of a chandala, तस्य for him, सदसि in the sacrifice, सुरर्षय: devatas and sages, हवि: offerings, कथम् how, भोक्तार: will partake.
1::59::14::विश्वामित्रेण by Visvamitra, पालिता: ruled, महात्मान: magnanimous, ब्राह्मणा: वा brahmins, चाण्डालभोजनम् food offered by a chandala, भुक्त्वा having partaken, स्वर्गम् heaven, कथम् how, गमिष्यन्ति will attain.
1::59::15::मुनिशार्दूल O Best among ascetics, समहोदया: along with mahodaya, ते सर्वे all of those, वासिष्ठा: sons of Vasishta, संरक्तलोचना: with reddened eyes, एतत् this, वचननैष्ठुर्यम् harsh word, ऊचु: spoke.
1::59::16::मुनिपुङ्गव: preeminent among ascetics, तेषां सर्वेषाम् all their, तत् वचनम् those words, श्रुत्वा having heard, क्रोधसंरक्तनयन: with eyes reddened with anger, सरोषम् with fury, इदम् this word, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::59::17::उग्रम् rigorous, तप: penance, आस्थितम् adopted, अदुष्टम् free from blemish, माम् me, ये who, दूषयन्ति abused, दुरात्मान: wickedminded ones, भस्मीभूता: reduced to ashes, भविष्यन्ति will become, संशय: न no doubt.
1::59::18::ते they, अद्य today itself, कालपाशेन by noose of death, वैवस्वतक्षयम् to the abode of Yama, नीता: having been brought, सप्तजातिशतान्येव seven hundred births, सर्वश: in all ways, मृतपा: feeding on corpses, सन्तु shall become.
1::59::19::निर्घृणा: merciless, मुष्टिका नाम born in the race of mushtikas, श्वमांसनियताहारा feeding on the flesh of dogs, विकृताश्च hideous, विरूपाश्च deformed, इमान् लोकान् in these worlds, अनुचरन्तु shall wander.
1::59::20::दुर्बुद्धि: wickedminded, महोदयस्तु as for Mahodaya, अदूष्यम् not fit to be blamed, माम् me, अदूषयत् हि blamed me, सर्वलोकेषु in all the worlds, दूषित: having been blamed, निषादत्वम् nishadahood, गमिष्यति will attain.
1::59::21::मम my, क्रोधात् because of anger, प्राणातिपातनिरतो depriving others of their life regularly, निरनुक्रोशताम् devoid of mercy, गत: attaining, दीर्घकालम् for a long time, दुर्गतिम् wretched life, वर्तयिष्यति will pursue.
1::59::22::महातपा: possessing fierce asceticism, महातेजा: highly powerful, महामुनि: mighty ascetic, विश्वामित्र: Visvamitra, ऋषिमध्ये in the assembly of rishis, एतावत् to this extent, वचनम् words, उक्त्वा having spoken, विरराम became silent.
