1::77::1::When Parasurama departed, Rama, son of Dasaratha with a serene mind gave the bow along with the arrow to Varuna of immeasurable strength.   
1::77::2::Thereafter Rama the descendant of the Raghus, paid obeisance to Vasishta and other rishis, and looked at his father who appeared agitated said:
1::77::3::Parasurama, son of Jamadagni, has gone. Let the four divisions of the army of  which you are the commander proceed towards Ayodhya.
1::77::4::The army which is under your command O King is awaiting your orders like the chatakas awaiting water. Direct them (to proceed).
1::77::5::On hearing the words 'Parasurama has departed' from Rama, king Dasaratha embraced him and kissed his forehead. The king, immensely happy, felt he and his son were reborn.
1::77::6::Thereafter, king Dasaratha directed his army to proceed speedily in advance. When he    reached the city of Ayodhya it looked welldecorated with flags and banners. It  resounded with trumpets. The royal highways were sprinkiled with water and strewn with flowers. It was filled with groups of people. Awaiting with delight the arrival of  the king the citizens produced merry sounds with musical instruments.
1::77::7::Prosperous king Dasaratha of great fame followed by his elegant sons entered the city of Ayodhya while the citizens and brahmins came forward from a long distance to welcome him who reentered his palace looking like the Himalayan moutain.
1::77::8::The king and his kith and kin were received with honour in a pleasing manner. Kausalya, Sumitra and Kaikeyi of slender waist and other women attending on the king were busy in receiving the new brides.
1::77::9::Thereafter the queens received the highly fortunate Sita, Urmila of high fame and both the daughters of Kusadhwaja, Mandavi and Srutakirti. 
1::77::10::With auspicious aricles in their hands, all the new brides who shone in silken apparels immediately went to temples and worshipped the family deities.
1::77::11::Then all the princesses paid obeisance to those worthy of worship and entered their residence that resembled the palace of Kubera.Thereafter pleased with gifting  cows, riches and corn to brahmins and satisfying them they joined their husbands and enjoyed themselves in privacy 
1::77::12:: All the princes who were best of men, great souls, incomparable in prowess on earth, capable of the use of weapons and endowed with wealth moved about with friends, serving their father and following his commands.
1::77::13::After some time king Dasaratha the delight of the Raghu race addressed his son Bharata:
1::77::14::The heroic Yudhajit son of the king of Kekaya, your maternal uncle, has come here and wishes to take you with him, O Child
1::77::15::O Knower of dharma this was his request to me in Mithila in the midst of sages. You should bring him delight (by obliging him).
1::77::16::Having heard the words of Dasaratha, Bharata, son of Kaikeyi paid obeisance to his father and Rama, embraced Lakshmana and prepared for the journey with Satrughna.
1::77::17::Valiant Bharata, the best of men took leave of his father Dasaratha, a tireless brother Rama and mothers and departed with Satrughna.
1::77::18::After the departure of Bharata, mighty Rama  and Lakshmana continued to serve their godlike father.  
1::77::19::Righteous Rama discharged his duties towards the citizens for their allround comfort and welfare giving top psriority to (the execution of) the command of his father.
1::77::20::With unfailing regularity Rama carried out his duties towards his mothers, and his elders, looking into them from time to time.
1::77::21::Dasaratha was pleased with the good conduct and character of Rama. Brahmanas as also the inhabitants of the city and the people of the country at large were happy with him.
1::77::22::In world the glorious and virtuous Rama armed with the power of truthfulness became the protector of the people like Brahma (to living beings).
1::77::23::With his heart fixed on Sita to whom he was always devoted, Rama, the wise went about enjoying with her (the beauty of) all the seasons.  
1::77::24::Chosen by his father Sita became Rama's beloved wife with her virtue and beauty his affection for her grew further.
1::77::25::For sita her husband was doubly dear. They were clearly communicating through each other's heart every thought generated in the mind. 
1::77::26::Sita was an embodiment of Lakshmi (goddess of wealth). In beauty she was like a goddess. Born in the city of Mithila as daughter to Janaka, she was always especially dear to him.
1::77::27::Rama, son of Rajarshi Dasaratha, united with the most charming princess, shone like Visnu, Lord of the gods in the company of Lakshmi.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये चतुर्विंशत्सहस्रिकायां संहितायां बालकाण्डे सप्तसप्ततितमस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the seventyseventh sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
