1::66::1:: The day dawned bright and clear when the king (Janaka) performed his daily routine rites and welcomed the great Viswamitra with the two Raghavas (Rama and Lakshmana). 
1::66::2::The virtuous Janaka paid respects to Viswamitra and the highsouled Rama and Lakshmana in accordance with the sastras and spoke:
1::66::3::Welcome, O Venerable one O Irreproachable one what can I do for you? Worthy of being commanded, I seek your orders.
1::66::4::At the words of the magnanimous Janaka, the virtuous sage wellversed in speech replied to the heroic king:
1::66::5::Dasaratha's sons, (Rama and Lakshmana), kshatriyas renowned in the world are eager to see that great bow in your possession.
1::66::6::Be blessed. Show this great bow to the princes. This is their desire. Once it is fulfilled, they will go back.
1::66::7::Thus addressed by the mighty ascetic Janaka replied, I shall tell you how this bow came to be deposited here.   
1::66::8::O Adorable one there was a famous king named Devarata, sixth in line from Nimi. This bow was kept with him in trust by the exalted lord (Shiva).
1::66::9::Earlier at the time of destruction of Daksha's sacrifice, Rudra endowed with  great prowess lifted this bow sportively and spoke to the gods.
1::66::10::'O gods in your anxiety to partake your share of the sacrifie, you have failed to provide mine in the sacrificial offerings. Therefore, I shall sever your jewelled heads and beautiful limbs with this bow'.  
1::66::11::O Eminent ascetic thereafter all the gods with agitated minds propitiated lord of the gods, Siva and he was pleased with them.
1::66::12::O Lord that gem of a bow belonging to Siva was given to the great gods who in turn got it deposited in trust with our ancestor.  
1::66::13::Thereupon while I was ploughing and cleaing the (sacrificial) ground, Sita, a wellknown name, was lifted up by the blade of the plough. Thus she was obtained by me.
1::66::14::Arisen from the earth and not from a mother's womb, she grew up as my daughter. I made a stipulation that (this shall be the means to win this maiden as a gift) this shall be given in marriage only to the prince whose prowess is fully tried.
1::66::15:: O Eminent ascetic arisen from the earth and reared as my daughter, she has been sought after in marriage by many princes. 
1::66::16::O Worshipful one all those monarchs sought this maiden but I did not offer my daughter saying that the 'marriage offer' could be made only through the tried and tested prowess of a suitor.
1::66::17:: O Preeminent among ascetics thereafter many kings together came to Mithila to test their prowess.
1::66::18:: The bow was brought and placed before those who were curious to test their strength but none was able to grasp or lift the bow.
1::66::19:: O great ascetic I knew those mighty kings had little strength, so rejected them.
1::66::20::O Mighty ascetic, thereafter all the kings doubting their own strength in stringing the bow were inflamed with anger and laid siege on Mithila.  
1::66::21:: Those eminent kings felt humiliated. Inflamed with anger, they tormented the city of Mithila. 
1::66::22:: O Best among ascetics thus one year passed. Everywhere in the city all the means of living were exhausted. I felt deeply sad over this situation. 
1::66::23::Thereafter, I propitiated the gods by my austerities. Highly pleased, they gave me an army of four divisions (chariots, elephants, horses and infantry ). 
1::66::24::Then those wicked kings who were exhausted were doubtful about their energy. They were beaten and defeated. They fled away along with their ministers in different directions.
1::66::25::O Sage you are a tiger among asceties, you are faithful to your vows, I shall show this effulgent bow to your Rama and Lakshmana . 
1::66::26:: O Sage if Rama could lift and string this bow I shall give my daughter Sita, not born from a woman, to him (son of Dasaratha).  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे षट्षष्टितमस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the sixtysixth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
