1::2::1::नारदस्य Narada's, तत् वाक्यम् those words, श्रुत्वा तु having heard, वाक्यविशारद: proficient in (shastras which are in the form of) speech, धर्मात्मा righteous, महामुनि: distinguished sage, सहशिष्य: along with his disciples, पूजयामास worshipped (praised) him.
1::2::2::देवर्षि: divine sage, स: नारद: Narada, तेन by him, तथा in that way, यथावत् in a fitting manner, पूजित: having been worshipped, आपृष्ट्वैव having taken leave of him, अभ्यनुज्ञात: having been permitted, विहायसम् to heaven, जगाम went. 
1::2::3::तस्मिन् when Narada, मुहूर्तम् instantly, देवलोकम् devaloka, गते having gone, तदा then, मुनि: sage Valmiki, जाह्नव्या: of river Ganges, अविदूरत: not very far from, तमसातीरम् bank of the river Tamasa, जगाम went.  
1::2::4::स: that, महामुनि: eminent sage, तमसाया: तीरम् the bank of the river Tamasa, समासाद्य  having reached, अकर्दमम् free from mud (pure and clear), तीर्थम् descent into the river दृष्ट्वा having seen, पार्श्वे by the side of, स्थितम् standing, शिष्यम् to the disciple, आह spoke.
1::2::5::भरद्वाज: O Bharadwaja, सन्मनुष्यमन: यथा like the mind of a virtuous man, अकर्दमम् clear and pure (without sin), प्रसन्नाम्बु pleasing waters, रमणीयम् beautiful, इदम् this, तीर्थम् holy spot, निशामय behold.          
1::2::6::तात O Dear, कलश: waterpitcher, न्यस्यताम् be placed on the ground, मम my, वल्कलम् bark garment, दीयताम् be given, उत्तमम् best (of holy spots), इदम् this, तमसातीर्थमेव spot on the bank of river Tamasa, अवगाहिष्ये I will enter.
1::2::7::महात्मना by the nobleminded, वाल्मीकेन by Valmiki, एवम् in this way, उक्त: having been asked, गुरो: of the spiritual master, नियत: obedient, भरद्वाज: Bharadwaja, तस्य मुने: for that sage Valmiki, वल्कलम् bark garment, प्रायच्छत gave.
1::2::8::नियतेन्द्रिय: possessing fully restrained senses, स: Valmiki, शिष्यहस्तात् from the hands of his disciple, वल्कलम् bark garment, आदाय having received, विपुलम् extensive, तत् वनम् that forest, सर्वत: all around, पश्यन् looking, विचचार ह wandered.
1::2::9::भगवान् the revered one, तत्र in that forest, तस्य of that holy spot, अभ्याशे in the vicinity, अनपायिनम् without being separated from each other even for a moment, चरन्तम् ranging through the forest, चारुनिस्वनम् melodiousvoiced, क्रौञ्चयो: krauncha birds, मिथुनम् pair of, ददर्श espied.
1::2::10::पापनिश्चय: of sinful intent, वैरनिलय: full of cruelty, निषाद: a hunter, तस्मात् मिथुनात् from that pair, एकं पुमांसं तु one male bird, तस्य पश्यत: neglecting his very presence, जघान killed.      
1::2::11::पतिना by her husband, सहचारिणा by the constant companion, ताम्रशीर्षेण with coppercrested head, मत्तेन with the one intoxicated by love, पत्रिणा by one possessing wings, सहितेन united, तेन द्विजेन from that male companion, वियुक्ता got separated, भार्या तु the female companion, निहतम् having been struck down, महीतले on the earth, वेष्टमानम् rolling (in blood), शोणितपरीताङ्गम् body drenched in blood, तम् that male bird, दृष्ट्वा having seen, करुणाम् causing pity, गिरम् words, रुराव uttered (wailed). 
1::2::12::तदा then, निषादेन by the fowler, निपातितम् struck down, तं that, द्विजम् bird, दृष्ट्वा having seen, धर्मात्मन: of the righteousminded, तस्य ऋषे: of that sage, कारुण्यम् compassion, समपद्यत filled.
1::2::13::तत: then, द्विज: sage Valmiki, रुदतीम् wailing, क्रौञ्चीम् female bird, निशाम्य having heard, करुणवेदित्वात् moved to compassion, अयम् this act of slaying during mating time, अधर्म: unrighteous act, इति thus,  इदम् वचनम् these words, अब्रवीत् uttered.     
1::2::14::निषाद O Fowler, त्वम् you, यत् for which reason, क्रौञ्चमिथुनात् from the pair of krauncha birds, काममोहितम् when they were infatuated by love, एकम् one, अवधी: have killed, (तत् for that reason), शाश्वती: permanently, समा: for long years, प्रतिष्ठां glorious, मा गम: you will never get. 
1::2::15::एवम् in this manner, ब्रुवत: having uttered, वीक्षत: reflecting, तस्य हृदि in his heart, अस्य शकुने: शोकार्तेन distressed by the grief of this bird, मया व्याहृतम् uttered by me, इदम् these words, किम् what?, चिन्ता बभूव a thought arose.    
1::2::16::महाप्राज्ञ: highly learned, मतिमान् wise, स: Valmiki, मतिं चकार thought, स: मुनिपुङ्गव: that  preeminent one among sages, चिन्तयन् pondering,शिष्यम् addressing his disciple, इदम् this, वाक्यम् statement, अब्रवीत् च and said.  
1::2::17::मे for me, शोकार्तस्य born out of sorrow (of slain bird), प्रवृत्त: came out without effort, पादबद्ध: consisting of four lines, अक्षरसम: each of equal number of syllables, तन्त्रीलयसमन्वित: with rhythm tuned to the accompaniment of stringed instruments, श्लोक: sloka, भवतु let it take a form, अन्यथा न not otherwise.   
1::2::18::शिष्यस्तु his disciple on his part, ब्रुवत: when words were spoken in this manner, तस्य मुने: that sage's, अनुत्तमम् excellent, वाक्यम् statement (verse), प्रतिजग्राह received (committed to memory), सन्हृष्ट: well pleased, गुरु: spiritual preceptor, तस्य in the matter of his disciple, तुष्ट: अभवत् was gratified.   
1::2::19::तत: thereafter, स: मुनि: Valmiki maharshi, तस्मिन् तीर्थे at that holy spot, यथाविधि according to the prescribed ritual, अभिषेकम् bathing, कृत्वा having performed, तम् that, अर्थमेव the matter itself, चिन्तयन् pondering over, उपावर्तत वै returned (to his hermitage).
1::2::20::तत: then, शिष्य: disciple, विनीत: humble, श्रुतवान् learned in scriptures, मुनि: saint, भरद्वाज: Bharadwaja, पूर्णम् filled with water, कलशम् waterpitcher, आदाय having received (carrying), पृष्ठत: behind him, अनुजगाम ह followed.
1::2::21::धर्मवित् knower of righteousness, स: Valmiki, शिष्येण सह with his disciples, आश्रमपदम् the hermitage, प्रविश्य having entered, ध्यानम् आस्थित: meditating on the incident, उपविष्ट: sitting, अन्या: other, कथा: stories, चकार composed.
1::2::22::तत: at that moment, लोककर्ता creator of the world, प्रभु: lord of the world, चतुर्मुख: fourfaced, महातेजा: effulgent, ब्रह्मा Brahma, मुनिपुङ्गवम् best among sages, तम् that Valmiki, द्रष्टुम् desirous of seeing, स्वयम् himself, आजगाम arrived.
1::2::23::अथ thereafter, प्रयत: purified by austerities, वाल्मीकि: Valmiki, तम् him, दृष्ट्वा having seen, परमविस्मित: was greatly amazed, सहसा immediately, उत्थाय got up, वाग्यत: disciplined in speech, प्राञ्जलि: भूत्वा with folded palms, तस्थौ stood.
1::2::24::तम् एनं देवम् that god, विधिवत् as enjoined by tradition, प्रणम्य bowing with profound reverence, अव्ययम् immutable (Brahma), अनामयं च welfare, पृष्ट्वा having enquired, पाद्यार्घ्यासनवन्दनै: fell at his feet with respectable offerings of reception, a befitting seat, and water for washing feet, पूजयामास worshipped.    
1::2::25::अथ thereafter, भगवान् the omnipotent Brahma, परमार्चिते highly worshipful, आसने seat, उपविश्य sat down, ततः from there, महर्षये to ascetic, वाल्मीकये for Valmiki, आसनम् seat, सन्दिदेश showed.
1::2::26::स: अपि he (Valmiki) also, ब्रह्मणा by lord Brahma, समनुज्ञात: having been asked, आसने in the seat, उपाविशत् sat down, तदा then, तस्मिन् सर्वलोकपितामहे when that lord Brahma, the grandsire of the worlds, (साक्षात् in the presence), उपविष्टे having been seated, वाल्मीकि: Valmiki, तद्गतेन एव set only on events (leading to the death of the krauncha bird), मनसा by his mind, ध्यानम् thoughts, आस्थित: was absorbed. 
1::2::27::य: that hunter, तादृशम् such, चारुरवम् sweet voiced, क्रौञ्चम् krauncha bird, अकारणात् without cause, हन्यात् killed, वैरग्रहणबुद्धिना with hostile feeling of capturing it, पापात्मना sinful minded, कष्टं(कर्म) act, कृतम् was done.
1::2::28::शोकपरायण: engrossed in grief, अन्तर्गतमना: भूत्वा having been introspective, मुहु: again and again, क्रौञ्चीम् एव about female krauncha bird, शोचन् lamenting, पुन: again, इमम् श्लोकम् this sloka, जगौ recited.  
1::2::29::तत: then, ब्रह्मा lord Brahma, प्रहसन् smiling, तं मुनिपुङ्गवम् addressing that preeminent among sages, उवाच spoke, त्वया by you, बद्ध: composed, श्लोक: एव sloka indeed, अत्र in this aspect, विचारणा doubt, न कार्या need not be entertained.
1::2::30::ब्रह्मन् OBrahmarshi, ते इयम् your this, सरस्वती speech, मच्छन्दादेव at my will, प्रवृत्ता originated, ऋषिसत्तम O most excellent ascetic, रामस्य Rama's, चरितम् history, सर्वम् in entirety, त्वम् you, कुरु compose.
1::2::31::धर्मात्मन: of the righteous natured, लोके in this world, गुणवत: of the virtuous, धीमत: of the  wise, धीरस्य of the steadfast, रामस्य Rama's, वृत्तम् history, ते to you, नारदात् through Narada, यथा in whichever manner, श्रुतम् heard, कथय narrate. 
1::2::32::धीमत: sagacious, सह सौमित्रे: along with Lakshmana, तस्य रामस्य Rama's, राक्षसानां च rakshsas, रहस्यं च unknown, प्रकाशं च known (deeds), सर्वश: by all means, यत् which, वृत्तम् history, वैदेह्याश्चापि about Sita and others, प्रकाशं यदि वा whether it is known to every body, रहो वा or unknown, यत् which, वृत्तम् history, तच्च that also, सर्वम् all, अविदितमपि even not known formerly, ते to you, विदितं भविष्यति will be revealed. 
1::2::33::अत्र काव्ये In this poem, ते वाक् your  words, काचित् not even one word, अनृता of untruth, न भविष्यति will not be spoken, पुण्याम् sacred, मनोरमाम् delightful, रामकथाम् history of Rama, श्लोकबद्धाम् in the form of slokas, कुरु compose.
1::2::34::गिरय: mountains, सरित: च and rivers, महीतले on this earth, यावत् स्थास्यन्ति as long as they exist, तावत् till then, रामायणकथा story of Ramayana, लोकेषु among the people, प्रचरिष्यति will prevail.
1::2::35::त्वत्कृता composed by you, रामायणकथा the Ramayana story, यावत् as long as, प्रचरिष्यति prevails, तावत् till then, त्वम् you, ऊर्ध्वम् the upper world, heaven, अधश्च the nether world, मल्लोकेषु in my (Brahmaloka), निवत्स्यसि will reside.
1::2::36::भगवान् ब्रह्मा lord Brahma, इति उक्त्वा having said this, तत्रैव there itself, अन्तरधीयत  vanished, तत: then, सशिष्य: along with his disciples, भगवान् मुनि: sage Valmiki, विस्मयम् astonishment, आययौ attained.
1::2::37::तत: then, तस्य his, शिष्या: disciples, सर्वे all, मुहुर्मुहु: again and again, प्रीयमाणा: being delighted, पुन: repeatedly, इमम् this, श्लोकम् sloka, जगु: chanted, भृशविस्मिता: exceedingly surprised, प्राहुश्च spoke about it. 
1::2::38::य: which ever, समाक्षरै: with equal number of syllables, चतुर्भि: by four, पादै: parts, महर्षिणा by maharshi, गीत: as told, स: श्लोक: that sloka, अनुव्याहरणात् because of repeated recitation, भूय: again, श्लोकत्वम् gloriousness, आगत: attained.
1::2::39::अहम् I, कृत्स्नम् entire, रामायणम् named Ramayana, काव्यम् poem, ईदृशै: in this metre, करवाणि shall compose, इयम् बुद्धि: this thought, भावितात्मन: who is capable of putting thoughts into action, तस्य (महर्षे:) वाल्मीकेः to Valmiki, जाता occurred.
1::2::40::कीर्तिमान् renowned, उदारधी: sagacious, मुनि: sage, तदा then, यशस्विन: celebrated, अस्य रामस्य Rama's, यशस्करम् conferring glory, काव्यम् poem, उदारवृत्तार्थपदै: in excellent words, meaning and set in good metre, मनोरमै: charming, समाक्षरै: equal number of syllables, श्लोकशतै: hundreds of verses, चकार composed.       
1::2::41::उपगतसमाससन्धियोगम् united with samasas (compound words, phrases), sandhis (pleasing conjunctions of words), सममधुरोपनतार्थवाक्यबद्धम् sentences composed of lucid, melodious and meaningful phrases, मुनिप्रणीतम् composed by ascetic Valmiki, रघुवरचरितम् history of Rama, दशशिरस: of the tenheaded Ravana, वधं च slaying, निशामयध्वम् you may listen. 
