1::56::1::Thus said Vasishta. Mighty Viswamitra lifted up agneya astra (shaft of fire) and discharging it said, 'stay, stay'.
1::56::2::Venerable Vasishta, in fury lifted the Brahmadanda which was like another rod of death. And spoke these words:    
1::56::3::O wicked kshatriya O son of Gadhi here I stand. Show me your strength and the pride of your arms. I will destroy them now.
1::56::4::O mean kshatriya where does your energy of a kshatriya stand in comparison with the great energy of Brahma? Behold my Brahmabala (Brahman's energy). 
1::56::5::The Brahmadanda (released by Vasishta) put down the dreadful agneya astra released by Gadhi's son just like the force of fire is extinguished by water.
1::56::6::The incensed son of Gadhi employed varuna, raudra, aindra, pasupata and aishika  weapons. 
1::56::7::O Descendent of Raghu Viswamitra employed weapons like manava, mohana, gandharva, swapana, jrimbhana, madana, santapana, vilapana, shoshana, darana, vajra weapons, Brahma, kala and varuna pasas, the favourite painaka, daita, shushka, ardra vajras, danda, paisacha, krauncha, weapons, dharmachakra, kalachakra, vishnuchakras, vayavya, mathana, hayasira weapons, kanakala, musala powers, vaidyadhara, kalatrishula, kapala, kankana weapons discharged against Vasishta the best of ascetics. All this became aweful.
1::56::8::Vasishta son of Brahma, swallowed all those weapons with his staff. When those weapons were humbled, son of Gadhi employed Brahmastra.
1::56::9::All the devatas, with Agni in the forefront, divine rishis, great uragas and gandharvas were agitated seeing the Brahmastra raised. When Brahmastra was discharged, the  three worlds became distressed.     
1::56::10::O Descendant of Raghu Vasishta who possessed the energy of Brahma swallowed that very dreadful Brahmastra entirely with the help of Brahmadanda.  
1::56::11::While swallowing Brahmastra  the great Vasishta looked fierce and  terrible causing the three worlds to faint.  
1::56::12::From every pore of the great Vasishta's body flames resembling rays of light with smoke emerged. 
1::56::13::The staff of Brahma in Vasishta's hand, resembling smokeless fire at the end of the dissolution of the worlds inflamed like another rod of death.  
1::56::14::Then hosts of saints praised Vasishta, the best among sages, saying O Brahmin, your energy is infallible, hold your energy by your enegy.
1::56::15::'O Brahman great ascetic Viswamitra was controlled by you. O Best of ascetics be pleased and let the worlds be delivered from distress'.
1::56::16::At this, Vasishta the most brilliant ascetic became quiet. The humiliated Viswamitra heaved a sigh and spoke these words:
1::56::17:: Shame Where is the might of a kshatriya? The energy of a brahmin is the real  energy. The staff of Brahma has singly destroyed all my weapons. 
1::56::18::Now I have realised the reason. With clear mind and senses, I shall undertake intense penance which will earn me brahminhood.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे षट्पञ्चाशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the fiftysixth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
