1::53::1::शत्रुसूदन O Destroyer of foes, Rama, वसिष्ठेन by Vasishta, एवम् in this manner, उक्ता spoken, कामधुक् wishfulfilling (cow), शबला Sabala, यस्य यस्य to whomsoever, यथा in whatever manner, ईप्सितम् desired, कामान् desires, विदधे arranged (fulfilled).
1::53::2::इक्षून् sugarcane, मधून् honey, तथा and, लाजान् fried grain, (वरासवान् quality liquor,)         वरासनान् in good containers, मैरेयान् invigorating liquors, महार्हाणि excellent, पानानि च syrups, उच्चावचान् with different kinds of, भक्ष्यांश्च of food.
1::53::3::अत्र here, उष्णाढ्यस्य hot, ओदनस्य of rice, पर्वतोपमा: resembling mountains, राशय: heaps, मृष्टान्नानि च savoury (delicious) foods, सूपाश्च pulses, तथैव and, दधिकुल्या: rivers of milkcurds, नानास्वादुरसानाम् of various kinds of tastes, षाडबानाम् edibles with all six  tastes, सुपूर्णानि completely filled, भाजनानि containers, गौडानि च preparations made of Jaggery, सहस्रश: in thousands, (distributed).  
1::53::4::राम O Rama, विश्वामित्रबलम् army of Visvamitra, सर्वम् (एव) whole of it, वसिष्ठेन by Vasishta, अभितर्पितम् having been satisfied, सुसन्तुष्ठम् highly pleased, हृष्टपुष्टजनायुतं आसीत् was filled with wellfed and rejoiced people.
1::53::5::तदा then, सान्त:पुरवर: with excellent from female apartments, सब्राह्मणपुरोहित: together with priests and brahmins, राजर्षि: royal sage, विश्वामित्र: राजापि  king Viswamitra also, हृष्ट: delighted, पुष्ट: अभवत् became satisfied. 
1::53::6::तदा then, पूजित: honoured, सामात्य: with counsellors, मन्त्रिसहित: together with ministers,  सभृत्य: with attendants, परमहर्षेण with great delight, युक्त: filled with, वसिष्ठम् addressing Vasishta, इदम् this word, अब्रवीत् spoke.  
1::53::7::ब्रह्मन् O Brahman, पूजार्हेण by (one) worthy of being worshipped, त्वया by you, अहम् I, पूजित: was received with warmth and respect, सुसत्कृत: well honoured, वाक्यविशारद O One conversant with speech, वाक्यम् these words, अभिधास्यामि I shall tell you, श्रूयताम् let it be heard. 
1::53::8::गवाम् of cows, शतसहस्रेण one hundred thousands, शबला Sabala, मम to me, दीयताम् let it be given, भगवन्,O Respectable one, एतत् this, रत्नं हि indeed gem, पार्थिव: king, रत्नहारी acquirer of jewels, द्विज O Brahmin, तस्मात् for that reason, शबलाम् Sabala, मे to me, देहि give, एषा this, धर्मत: by right, मम is mine.
1::53::9::विश्वामित्रेण by Visvamitra, एवम् in this manner, उक्त: addressed, भगवान् the revered one, धर्मात्मा virtuous, मुनिसत्तम: eminent among ascetics, वसिष्ठ: Vasishta, महीपतिम् addressing the king, प्रत्युवाच replied.   
1::53::10::राजन् O King, अहम् I, गवाम् of cows, शतसहस्रेण in  hundreds of thousands, शबलाम् Sabala, न दास्यामि shall not give, कोटि शतै: अपि by hundreds of crores also, न shall not, रजतस्य of silver, राशिभि: च heaps of (shall not give). 
1::53::11::अरिन्दम O Tormentor of enemies, Visvamitra, इयम् this cow, मत्सकाशात् from my proximity, परित्यागम् separation, न अर्हा not proper, आत्मवत: for righteous man, कीर्तिः यथा like fame, शबला Sabala, मह्यम् for me, शाश्वती is permanent.
1::53::12::हव्यं च Havyam (oblations to be given to gods), कव्यं च Kavyam ( to be given to pitris), तथैव च and, प्राणयात्रा carrying out necessities of life, अग्निहोत्रं च maintenance of the sacred fire and offering oblations, बलि: offerings to spirits of all created beings, तथैव च and also, होम: offerings, अस्याम् in this cow, आयत्तम् are dependant.
1::53::13::राजर्षे O Royal saint, स्वाहाकारवषट्कारौ Swaha and Vashat, तथा and, विविधा: various branches of, विद्या: learning, एतत् सर्वम् all these things, अत्र in this cow, आयत्तम् are dependant, संशय: न no doubt.
1::53::14::एतत् this one, सत्येन truly, मम my, सर्वस्वम् whole possession, सदा always, तुष्टिकरी causes contentment, राजन् O King,  बहुभि: by various, कारणै: reasons, शबलाम् Sabala, तव to you, न दास्ये will not give. 
1::53::15::वाक्यविशारद: (the king) skilled in conversation, विश्वामित्र: Visvamitra, वसिष्ठेन through Vasishta, एवम् in this manner, उक्त: spoken, अत्यर्थम् extreme, संरब्धतरम् more excited, वाक्यम् words, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::53::16::हैरण्यकक्ष्याग्रैवेयान् with gold trappings around the neck and girth (of an elephant), सुवर्णाङ्कुशभूषितान् adorned with (elephant) goads made of gold, कुञ्जरान् elephants, तेषाम् such elephants, चतुर्दशसहस्राणि fourteen thousands, ददामि I shall give.   
1::53::17::श्वेताश्वानाम of white horses, चतुर्युजाम् capable of being yoked with four (horses), हैरण्यानाम् made of gold, रथानाम् chariots, किङ्किणीकविभूषितान् decorated with small tinkling bells, अष्टौ शतान् eight hundred, ते to you, ददामि shall give.
1::53::18::सुव्रत O Maharshi of auspicious vows (religious practices ), देशजातानाम् born in good country, कुलजानाम् born of noble (good) breeds, महौजसाम् mighty, हयानाम् horses, एकं दश च eleven, सहस्रम् thousands, तव to you, ददामि shall give.
1::53::19::नानावर्णविभक्तानाम् distinctly separated by colours, तथैव and, वयस्स्थानाम् of youthful, गवाम् cows, एकाम् one, कोटिम् crore, ददामि I shall give, मम for me, शबला Sabala, दीयताम् be given. 
1::53::20::द्विजोत्तम O Best of brahmins, रत्नं वा either jewels, हिरण्यं वा or gold, यावत् as much, इच्छसि you desire, तत्सर्वं all that, तावत् that much, ददामि shall give, शबला Sabala, मम to me, दीयताम् be given. 
1::53::21::धीमता by the sagacious, विश्वामित्रेण by Visvamitra, एवम् in this way, उक्त: spoken, भगवान् the adorable one, राजन् O King, कथञ्चन by any means, शबलाम् Sabala, न दास्यामि I shall not give, इति thus, प्राह replied. 
1::53::22::एतदेव this is verily, मे my, रत्नं हि jewel indeed, एतदेव this is verily, मे my, धनम् wealth, एतदेव हि this is verily, सर्वस्वं allinall, एतदेव this is verily, जीवितम् my very life.
1::53::23::राजन् O King, मे for me, दर्शश्च Darsa sacrifice, पूर्णमासश्च Purnamasa sacrifice, आप्तदक्षिणा: with appropriate gifts, यज्ञाश्च sacrifices, तथा and, विविधा: various, क्रियाश्च rites, एतदेव हि verily is this(cow).
1::53::24::राजन् O King, मम my, सर्वा: all, क्रिया: actions, अदोमूला: are rooted here (in her), संशय: न no doubt, बहुना with many, प्रलापेन useless words, किम् what is the use, कामदोहिनीम्  desire fulfilling cow, न दास्ये I shall not give.
