1::31::1::अथ then, कृतार्थौ having fulfilled their purpose, मुदितौ rejoicing, वीरौ two heroes, रामलक्ष्मणौ Rama and Lakshmana, तां रजनीम् that night, प्रहृष्टेन with delighted, अन्तरात्मना hearts, तत्र there, ऊषतु: lived.   
1::31::2::शर्वर्याम् when that night (had passed away), प्रभातायाम् at dawn, कृतपौर्वाह्णिकक्रियौ performing religious rites relating to forenoon, सहितौ together, विश्वामित्रम् Visvamitra, अन्यान् other, ऋषींश्च rishis, अभिजग्मतु: approached.
1::31::3::मधुरभाषिणौ having the disposition of agreeable speech, ज्वलन्तम् flaming, पावकम् इव like fire, मुनिश्रेष्ठम् best of ascetics, अभिवाद्य saluting with folded hands, मधुरोदारम् in sweet and generous way, वाक्यम् words, ऊचतु: uttered.
1::31::4::मुनिशार्दूल O Best of ascetics, किङ्करौ two servants, इमौ here we are, समुपस्थितौ स्म in attendance in your presence, यथेष्टम् freely, आज्ञापय command us, किम् what, शासनम् order, करवाव shall we both do.
1::31::5::ताभ्याम् by both of them, एवम् in this way, उक्ता: having been addressed, महर्षय: maharshis, सर्वे एव all of them, विश्वामित्रम् Viswamitra, पुरस्कृत्य placing in the forefront, रामम् addressing Rama, वचनम् words, अब्रुवन् spoke.
1::31::6::नरश्रेष्ठ O Foremost of men, मैथिलस्य of the king of Mithila, जनकस्य Janaka's, परमधर्मिष्ठ: highly conforming to righteousness, यज्ञ: sacrifice, भविष्यति is going to be performed, वयम् we, तस्य of that sacrifice, यास्यामहे shall go there.
1::31::7::नरशार्दूल O Best among men, त्वम् च you also, अस्माभि: सह along with us, गमिष्यसि will go, तत्र there, अद्भुतम् wonderful, तत् धनुरत्नं च that  jewel of bow, द्रष्टुम् to see, अर्हसि you are  worthy of seeing.
1::31::8::नरश्रेष्ठ O Best among men, अप्रमेयबलम् having  immeasurable energy, घोरम् dreadful, परमभास्वरम् highly lustrous, तत् that (bow), पूर्वम् in the ancient days, दैवतै: by devatas, मखे at the sacrifice, सदसि in the sacrificial assembly, दत्तम् was bestowed.
1::31::9::अस्य of that, आरोपणम् stringing of bow, कर्तुम् to do, देवा: devas, न शक्ता: are not capable, गन्धर्वा: gandharvas ,न not capable, असुरा: asuras, न not capable, राक्षसा: च rakshasas also, न not capable, मानुषा: men, कथञ्चन in any way, न not capable.
1::31::10::राजपुत्रा: princes, महाबला: possesing mighty strength, महीक्षित: kings, तस्य धनुष: that bow's, वीर्यम् prowess, जिज्ञासन्त: intent on knowing, आरोपयितुम् attempted to lift or string it, न शेकु: failed.
1::31::11::नरशार्दूल O Best among men, काकुत्स्थ O Descendent of Kakutstha, महात्मन: of the  magnanimous, मैथिलस्य of the king of Mithila, तद्धनु: that bow, अद्भुतदर्शनम् wonderful to look at, यज्ञं च that sacrifice, तत्र there, द्रक्ष्यसि you will see.
1::31::12::नरशार्दूल O Best among men, सुनाभम् with strong centre, तत् that, उत्तमं superior, धनु: bow, तेन मैथिलेन by the king of Mithila, Devarata, सर्वदैवतै: by all devatas, यज्ञफलम् as fruit of the sacrifice, याचितं हि solicited.
1::31::13::राघव O Rama, तस्य नृपते: that king's, वेश्मनि in the house, आयागभूतम् as principal deity in the festival of bows, विविधै: by various kinds of, गन्धै: sandal wood paste, अगरुगन्धिभि: fragrant Agaru, धूपैश्च with incense, अर्चितम् is worshipped.
1::31::14::मुनिवर: the best of ascetics, एवम् in this way, उक्त्वा having spoken, सर्षिसङ्घ: in the company of rishis, सकाकुत्स्थ: along with Kakutstha, वनदेवता: sylvian deities, आमन्त्र्य taking leave of, तदा then, प्रस्थानम् journey, अकरोत् performed.    
1::31::15::(O Deities of the forest) व: स्वस्ति may safety be yours, सिद्ध: my purpose has been achieved, अहम् I, सिद्धाश्रमात् from Siddha ashrama, उत्तरे जाह्नवीतीरे on northern side of river Jahnavi, हिमवन्तम् named Himavanta, शिलोच्चयम् mountain, गमिष्यामि I shall go. 
1::31::16::तत: thereafter, अनुत्तमम् the supreme, सिद्धाश्रमम् Siddha asrama, प्रदक्षिणम्     circumambulation, कृत्वा having made, उत्तरां दिशमुद्दिश्य towards northern direction, प्रस्थातुम् to perform journey, उपचक्रमे commenced.  
1::31::17::प्रयान्तम् as he set out for his onward journey, तं मुनिवरम् the best of ascetics, अनुसारिणाम् who was following, ब्रह्मवादिनाम् of the expounders of vedas, प्रायेण nearly, शकटीशतमात्रम् one hundred carriages alone, अन्वयात् followed.
1::31::18::सिद्धाश्रमनिवासिन: living in Siddha asrama, मृगपक्षिगणाश्चैव hosts of birds and beasts, महात्मानम् the illustrious, विश्वामित्रं महामुनिम् maharshi Visvamitra, अनुजग्मु: followed, पक्षिसङ्गान् host of birds, मृगानपि beasts, (ततः) निवर्तयामास sent them back. 
1::31::19::ते मुनिगणा: those groups of sages, दूरम् अध्वानम् a long way, गत्वा having gone, दिवाकरे when the Sun, लम्बमाने was hanging down, समाहिता: assembled, शोणाकूले on the bank of river Sona, वासम् halt, चक्रु: made.
1::31::20::अमितौजस: men possessing great splendour, ते those sages, दिनकरे when the Sun, अस्तंगते was set, स्नात्वा having bathed, हुतहुताशना: having kindled fire, विश्वामित्रम् Viswamitra, पुरस्कृत्य having honoured him, निषेदु: sat down.
1::31::21::सहसौमित्रि: together with Lakshmana, राम: अपि Rama also, तान् मुनीन् those sages, अभिपूज्य offering respectful salutations, अथ thereafter, धीमत: of the sagacious, विश्वामित्रस्य Viswamitra, अग्रत: in front of, निषसाद sat down.
1::31::22::अथ thereafter, महातेजा: highly lustrous, नरशार्दूल: best among men, राम: Rama, कौतूहलसमन्वित: filled with curiosity, महामुनिम् great sage, विश्वामित्रम् Viswamitra, पप्रच्छ enquired. 
1::31::23::भगवन् O Worshipful one, समृद्धवनशोभित: shining with affluent groves, अयम् देश: this region, क: नु what could be?, श्रोतुम् to listen, इच्छामि I am desirous, ते भद्रम् may safety be to you, तत्त्वत: truly, वक्तुम् अर्हसि you are fit to tell me.
1::31::24::सुव्रत: O Man of excellent vows, महातपा: a sage who performed rigid austerities, रामवाक्येन by the words of Rama, चोदित: urged by, ऋषिमध्ये in the midst of rishis, तस्य  देशस्य that region's, निखिलम् entire story, कथयामास described.
