1::71::1::Vasishta having thus described (the genealogy of Dasaratha) Janaka with folded hands rejoined, Be blessed. Let me relate the genealogy  of my race. Listen.
1::71::2::O Great sage O Best of ascetics while one offers his daughter (in marriage), one born in a noble family should describe his genealogy in full. Listen.
1::71::3::There was a great man of religion king Nimi, strongest of men and wellknown in the three worlds by his own acts.
1::71::4::Nimi begot a son named Mithi who constructed Mithila. He was the first Janaka whose son was Udavasu.
1::71::5::Virtuous Nandivardhana was the son of Udavasu whose son was Suketu.
1::71::6::Suketu's son was the righteous and powerful Devarata, father of Brihadradha.
1::71::7::Brihadradha's son was the heroic and powerful Mahavira, father of Sudhruti, who was armed with courage and the power of truth.
1::71::8::To Sudhruti was born the righteous Drishtaketu, committed to dharma. Rajarshi Drishtaketu was father to the wellknown Haryasva.
1::71::9::Haryasva's son was Maru, father of Pratindhaka. Pratindhaka's son was the righteous king Kirtiratha.
1::71::10::The son of Kirtiratha was known as Devamidha. His son was Vibudha, father of Mahidhraka.
1::71::11::Mighty king Kirtirata was the son of Mahidhraka. He was a Rajarshi, father of Maharoma. 
1::71::12::To Maharoma's was born the virtuous Swarnaroma. Swarnaroma's son was Hrasvaroma.
1::71::13::Hrasvaroma, was a religious king. He was a great soul. Of his two sons. I am the eldest and valiant Kusadhwaja is my younger brother. 
1::71::14::My father king Hrasvaroma crowned me king, entrusted Kusadhwaja to my care and retired to the forest.
1::71::15::After my aged father attained heaven, I looked after my brother Kusadhwaja, who resembles the celestials, affectionately and ruled the kingdom with righteousness.
1::71::16::A little later a powerful king named Sudhanva from the city of Sankasya beseiged Mithila.
1::71::17::He (Sudhanva) sent me a message: 'give me the great bow of Siva and the lotuseyed maiden Sita'.
1::71::18::O Brahmarshi when I refused, a great conflict broke out between him and me. In the encounter king Sudhanva was killed by me.  
1::71::19::O Best of ascetics having killed king Sudhanva, I have crowned my heroic brother Kusadhwaja in Sankasya. 
1::71::20::O Great ascetic (Vasishta), this one is my youger brother and I am the elder one. O preeminent among ascetics with immense pleasure I am giving these maidens, Sita to Rama and Urmila to Lakshmana. Be blessed
1::71::21::I offer my daughter Sita, who looks like a celestial maiden as reward for (Rama's) prowess and my second daughter Urmila (to Lakshmana). I proclaim it three times so that there is no doubt about it. 
1::71::22::O Delight of the Raghus (King Dasaratha), I offer these brides with immense pleasure to Rama and Lakshmana. You may perform the rites for your forefathers by gift of cows. Prosperity to you. Thereafter you may perform the marriage. 
1::71::23:: Today the star Makha is on the ascendant. O King perform the marriage on the, third day from today under UttaraPhalguni star. Gifts may be given for the happiness of Rama and Lakshmana.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकसप्ततितमस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the seventyfirst sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
