1::15::1::तत: then, मेथावी great retentive intellectual, वेदज्ञ: knowledgeable in vedas, स: he, किञ्चित् for a little while, ध्यात्वा having pondered, तत: there after, लब्धसंज्ञ: recollected his memory, तम् that, नृपम् king, अब्रवीत् said.
1::15::2::अहम् I, ते for you, पुत्रकारणात् for begetting sons, अथर्वशिरसि in 'Atharva Siras' portion of veda, प्रोक्तै: declared, मन्त्रै: by mantras, सिद्धाम् realising the desires, पुत्रीयाम् capable of bestowing sons, इष्टिम् sacrifice, विधानत: as per tradition, करिष्यामि I will perform.
1::15::3::तत: then,  पुत्रकाराणात् for begetting  sons, पुत्रीयाम् for the sake of begetting children, ताम् इष्टिम् that sacrifice, प्राक्रम्यत् having commenced, तेजस्वी effulgent Rsyasringa मन्त्रदृष्टेन in accordance with mantras, कर्मणा with sacrificial acts,  अग्नौ in the fire, जुहाव च poured oblations.
1::15::4::तत: thereafater, सगन्धर्वा: along with gandharvas, देवा: (celestial deities) devatas, सिद्धाश्च siddhas, परमर्षय: great sages, यथाविधि according to tradition, भागप्रतिग्रहार्थम् to receive their share of offerings, समवेता: वै assembled.
1::15::5::ता: देवता: those devatas (celestial deities), यथान्यायम् as per custom, तस्मिन् in that, सदसि assembly place, समेत्य having assembled, लोककर्तारम् creator of the worlds, ब्रह्माणम् lord Brahma, महत् important, वचनम् these words, अब्रुवन् addressed.
1::15::6::भगवन् O Revered lord, रावणो नाम by name Ravana, राक्षस: rakshasa (demonical in nature), त्वत्प्रसादेन by your grace, वीर्यात् by the prowess, न: us, सर्वान् all, बाधते is oppressing, तम् him, शासितुम् to punish, न शक्नुम: we are not capable.
1::15::7::भगवन् O Venerable lord, पुरा earlier, प्रीतेन by the well pleased, त्वया by you, तस्मै for him, वर: boon, दत्त: granted, तम् that, मानयन्त: honouring, तस्य for his, सर्वम् entirely, नित्यम् always, क्षमामहे we endure.
1::15::8::दुर्मति: evil minded, त्रीन् three, लोकान् worlds, उद्वेजयति inflicting pains, उच्छ्रितान् the guardians of earth, द्वेष्टि hates, त्रिदशराजानम् lord of celestial beings, शक्रम् Indra, प्रधर्षयितुम् to assault him, इच्छति he is desirous.
1::15::9::दुर्धष: the unassailable one, वरदानेन because of the boons, मोहित: is puffed with pride, ऋषीन् sages, यक्षान् yakshas, सगन्धर्वान् along with gandharvas, असुरान् asuras, तथा and, ब्राह्मणान् brahmins, अतिक्रामति tresspasses.
1::15::10::एनम् for him, सूर्य: Sun, न प्रतपति does not torment him, मारुत: wind, पार्श्वे near, न वाति does not blow, चलोर्मिमाली incessantly moving waves, समुद्रोऽपि even the ocean, तम् him, दृष्ट्वा having seen, न कम्पते does not stir (shake).
1::15::11::तत् for that reason, घोरदर्शनात् from the one of dreadful appearance, तस्मात् from him, राक्षसात् rakshasa, न: for us, महत् great, भयम् terror, भगवन् O Lord, तस्य for his, वधार्थम्   destruction, उपायम् means, कर्तुम् to do, अर्हसि you are capable.
1::15::12::सर्वै: by all, सुरै: devatas, एवम् in this manner, उक्त: spoken, चिन्तयित्वा having reflected, तत: then, अब्रवीत् said, तस्य that, दुरात्मन: wickedminded, अयम् this, वधोपाय: means of destrction, विदित: is known, हन्त Oh
1::15::13::तेन by him, गन्धर्वयक्षाणाम् of (by) gandharvas and yakshas, देवदानवरक्षसाम् gods, demons and rakshasas, अवध्य: अस्मि I am incapable of being destroyed, इति in this manner, वाक् words, उक्ता spoken, मया च by me also, तत् that one, तथा be it so, उक्तम् said.
1::15::14::तत् रक्ष: that rakshasa, अवज्ञानात् due to disdain, मानुषान् प्रति about the men, न अकीर्तयत् did not mention, तस्मात् for that reason, स: he, मानुषात् by man, वध्य: is fit to be destroyed, अस्य for him, अन्य: any other, मृत्यु: means of death, न विद्यते is not possible.
1::15::15::तदा then, ब्रह्मणा by Brahma, समुदाहृतम् mentioned, एतत् these, प्रियं वाक्यम् delighted  words, श्रुत्वा having heard, ते देवा: those devatas (celestial deities), महर्षय: maharshis, सर्वे all, प्रहृष्टा: अभवन् felt happy.
1::15::16::एतस्मिन् अन्तरे at this juncutre, माहाद्युति: highly effulgent, शङ्खचक्रगदापाणि: bearing in his hands Conch, Discus and Mace, पीतवासा: attired in yellow apparel, जगत्पति: lord of the world, विष्णु: Visnu, उपयात: arrived.
1::15::17::ब्रह्मणा by Brahma, समागम्य having met, तत्र there, समाहित: with composed mind, तस्थौ remained, सुरा: devatas, सर्वे all, सन्नता: prostrating, तम् him, समभिष्टूय paying homage with hymns, अब्रुवन् spoke.
1::15::18::विष्णो O Visnu, लोकानाम् for all the worlds, हितकाम्यया desirous of doing benefit, त्वाम् you, नियोक्ष्यामहे we are appointing, विष्णो OVisnu, त्वम् you, अयोध्याधिपते: of the Sovereign of Ayodhya, प्रभो: of the king, धर्मज्ञस्य of the righteous, वदान्यस्य of the generous, महर्षिसमतेजस: of one equalling rishis in lusture, तस्य his, दशरथस्य राज्ञ: king Dasaratha's ह्री श्री कीर्त्युपमासु comparable to Hri (Modesty), Shree (auspiciousness), Kirti (fame) the daughters of Daksha, तिसृषु among the three, भार्यासु wives, आत्मानम्  thy self, चतुर्विधम् in four ways, कृत्वा having divided, पुत्रत्वम् in the form of sons, आगच्छ come.
1::15::19::विष्णो: O Visnu, त्वम् you, तत्र there, मानुष: in the form of man, भूत्वा having been born, प्रवृद्धम् increasingly becoming arrogant, लोककण्टकम् source of vexation and terror to the worlds, दैवतै: by gods, अवध्यम् invincible, रावणम् Ravana, समरे in the battle, जहि slay.
1::15::20::स: that, मूर्ख: dull headed, राक्षस: rakshasa, रावण: Ravana, देवांश्च gods, गन्धर्वान् gandharvas, सिद्धांश्च siddhas, मुनिसत्तमान् great rishis, वीर्योत्सेकेन by his haughty prowess, बाधते हि is tormenting indeed.
1::15::21::तत: thus, तेन that, क्रूरेण by the cruel one, ऋषयश्च rishis, तथा and, नन्दनवने in Nandana groves, क्रीडन्त: sporting, गन्धर्वाप्सरस: gandharvas and apsaras, हिंसिता: किल are reported to be tortured.
1::15::22::वयम् we, सिद्धगन्धर्वयक्षाश्च siddhas, gandharvas and yakshas, मुनिभि: सह along with ascetics, तस्य his, वधार्थम् in order to kill him, आयाता: have come, तत: for that reason, त्वाम् you, शरणम् गता: we have taken refuge in you.
1::15::23::परन्तप OTormentor of enemies, देव OVisnu, त्वम् you, न: सर्वेषाम् for all of us, परमा supreme, गति: refuge, देवशत्रूणाम् of the enemies of gods (rakshasas), वधाय for the destruction, नृणाम् लोके in the world of men, मन: mind, कुरु resolve.
1::15::24::त्रिदशपुङ्गव: foremost of gods, सर्वलोकनमस्कृत: bowed by all in the worlds, देवेश: lord of devatas, celestial beings, विष्णु: Visnu, एवम् in this manner, उक्त: addressed, समेतान् assembled, धर्मसंहितान् guided by law of righteousness, पितामहपुरोगान् led by the grand  sire, तान् those, सर्वान् all, त्रिदशान् gods, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::15::25::भयम् fear, त्यजत abandon, भद्रम् blessings (to you), व: for your, हितार्थम् welfare, सपुत्रपौत्रम् along with his sons and grandsons, सामात्यम् along with his ministesrs, समित्रज्ञाति बान्धवम् along with friends, relations and allies, क्रूरम् cruel, दुरात्मानम् wicked minded, देवर्षीणाम् for gods and rishis, भयावहम् dreadful, रावणम् Ravana, युधि in the battle, हत्वा after killing, इमाम् पृथिवीम् this earth, पालयन् while ruling, दशवर्षसहस्राणि ten thousand years, दशवर्षशतानि ten hundred years, मानुषे लोके in the world of men, वत्स्यामि I will dwell.
1::15::26::आत्मवान् the highest soul, विष्णु: देव: lord Visnu, देवानाम् for devatas, एवम् in this manner, वरम् boon, दत्वा having given, अथ there after, आत्मन: for himself, मानुषे in the world of men, जन्मभूमिम् place of birth, चिन्तयामास reflected.
1::15::27::तत: thereafter, पद्मपलाशाक्ष: lord having eyes resembling lotus petals, तदा then, आत्मानम् himself, चतुर्विधम् in four ways, कृत्वा having made, दशरथम् नृपम् king Dasaratha, तथा पितरम् as father, रोचयामास liked.
1::15::28::तदा then, सरुद्रा: along with rudras, साप्सरोगणा: along with groups of apsaras, देवर्षिगन्धर्वा: devatas, rishis and gandharvas, दिव्यरूपाभि: celestial beauty, स्तुतिभि: hymns, मधुसूदनम् slayer of Madhu, तुष्टुवु: praised.
1::15::29::उद्धतम् inflamed, उग्रतेजसम् one with frightful prowess, प्रवृद्धदर्पम् having fully grown insolence, त्रिदशेश्वरद्विषम् the enemy of the lord of gods (Indra ), तपस्विकण्टकम् source of vexation to ascetics, तपस्विनाम् for maharshis, भयावहम् dreadful, तम् him, तम् रावणम् that Ravana, विरावणम् he who causes grerat agony in the three worlds making people cry loudly, साधु rightly, उद्धर uproot him.
1::15::30::सबलम् along with his forces, सबान्धवम् with his relations, विरावणम् causing distress in  the worlds, अग्य्रपौरुषम् having foremost manliness, तम् एव him only, रावणम् Ravana, हत्वा having slain, चिरम् in long time, गतज्वर: purged of distress, सुरेन्द्रगुप्तम् protected by Indra, गतदोषकल्मषम् freed from faults and sins, स्वर्लोकम् celestial region, आगच्छ return.
