1::23::1::When the night turned into daybreak, the eminent ascetic Viswamitra, addressing the descendants of Kakutstha (Rama and Lakshmana) who were lying on a bed of leaves said:
1::23::2::O beloved son of Kausalya, O Rama the day dawns. O best among men, awake, oblations to gods and other sacred rites are required to be performed. 
1::23::3:: On hearing the very affectionate call of Viswamitra both the brave princes had their bath and offered oblations to Sungod (standing in the water) and recited the holy name of the Lord.
1::23::4::On performing the morning rites, the two highly powerful and and energetic princes stood before Viswamitra who was richly endowed with asceticism. They prostrated before him. And stood ready for their onward journey. 
1::23::5::Thereafter, having gone a little further both the heroic brothers looked at the confluence of holy  Sarayu with  divine Ganga divided into three branches.
1::23::6::There they saw a sacred hermitage of anchorites of great vitality performing severe austerities for thousands of years. 
1::23::7::Exceedingly delighted to see the sacred hermitage, the two princes enquired from the illustrious sage Viswamitra:
1::23::8:: O worshipful one, whose sacred hermitage is this? Who lives here? Indeed, we are curious to know.
1::23::9::On having heard their words, the foremost of sages gently smiled and said, O Rama listen, who this hermitage belonged to in the past.
1::23::10::Kandarpa (the god of love) once lived here in human form. He is called Kama by the learned. The wicked Kama on his way with the maruts (god of wind) insulted Siva, the god of gods, while he was absorbed in austere meditation along with his newly wedded consort. On seeing Kama Lord Siva roared at him (menacingly).
1::23::11:: O descendant of Raghu, burnt down by his fierce (third) eye, all the limbs of the body of that evilminded Kama were consumed.
1::23::12::Having been completely burnt down by Lord Siva, Kama's body was destroyed. Mighty angry, Siva, reduced Kama to a 'disembodied being.
1::23::13::O descendant of the Raghus, from that time onwards, he was known as 'Ananga' (one without form). The  beautiful place where he gave up his body is known as Angadesa. 
1::23::14::This holy hermitage belongs to Kama. These ascetics are his disciples. They are  always righteous and are free from sin.
1::23::15:: O auspiciouslooking Rama, we will stay here tonight at the confluence of both these sacred rivers (Sarayu and Ganga) and cross over Ganga tomorrow.
1::23::16::O best of men, after morning ablutions offering oblations to the sacred fire, all of us sanctified will enter this pious hermitage.
1::23::17:: As they were conversing thus, the ascetics, with their far reaching spiritual vision (beyond the veil of time) recognised them and were immensely pleased.
1::23::18::After extending hospitality to the son of Kusika (Viswamitra) with respectful offerings, and water for washing feet they played the host to Rama and Lakshmana. 
1::23::19::Having received due hospitality, they delighted them (ascetics) with their talk. The rishis with composed minds recited their evening prayer as usual.
1::23::20::The ascetics who resided there, faithful to their vows, took them in. There they staed happily  in Kama's hermitage.
1::23::21::Foremost among the ascetics the son of Kusika (Viswamitra) delighted the charming  princes with enchanting tales. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे त्रयोविंशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the twentythird sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
