1::39::1::रघुनन्दन: Rama, विश्वामित्रवच: Visvamitra's words, श्रुत्वा having heard, परमप्रीत: immensely pleased, कथान्ते at the end of the narration of the tale, दीप्तम् flaming, अनलमिव fire like, मुनिम् addressing the ascetic, उवाच spoke.
1::39::2::ब्रह्मन् O Brahmana, इमां कथाम् this tale, विस्तरेण in detail, श्रोतुम् to listen, इच्छामि I am desirous, ते भद्रम् prosperity to you, मे my, पूर्वक: ancestor, यज्ञम् sacrifice, कथम् how, समुपाहरत् arranged.
1::39::3::विश्वामित्रस्तु Visvamitra on his part, प्रहसन्निव (as though) smilingly, काकुत्स्थम् addressing Rama, उवाच spoke, महात्मन: of the magnanimous, सगरस्य Sagara's, विस्तर: in detail, श्रूयताम् may be heard.
1::39::4::शङ्करश्वशुर: Sankara's fatherinlaw, हिमवान्नाम named Himavt, अचलोत्तम: excellent mountain, विन्ध्यपर्वतम् Vindhya mountain, आसाद्य approaching, परस्परम् each other, निरीक्षेते beholding.  
1::39::5::पुरुषोत्तम O Best among men, स: यज्ञ: that sacrifice, तयो: मध्ये in the region in between  these two mountains, प्रवृत्त: अभूत् happened, नरव्याघ्र O Tiger among men, स: देश: that country, यज्ञकर्मणि for acts of sacrifices, प्रशस्तो हि is commendable.    
1::39::6::तात O Child, काकुत्स्थ O Kakutstha, दृढधन्वा possessing strong bow, महारथ: great charioteer, अंशुमान् Anshuman,सगरस्य Sagara's, मते on the wish, स्थित: abiding by, तस्य relating to that sacrifice, अश्वचर्याम् following the horse, अकरोत् carried out.
1::39::7::वासव: Vasava (Indra), राक्षसीम् pertaining to rakshasa, तनुम् body, आस्थाय assuming, पर्वणि on the concluding day of the fornight (fullnew moon), तं यज्ञं यजमानस्य while the sacrificer  was performing sacrifice, तस्य Sagara's, यज्ञीयाश्वम् horse relating to sacrifice, अपाहरत् had stolen.  
1::39::8::काकुत्स्थ O Kakutstha, महात्मन: magnanimous Sagara's, तस्मिन् अश्वे when that horse, ह्रियमाणे was being stolen away, अथ afterwards, सर्वे all, उपाध्यायगणा: the priests, यजमानम् performer of the sacrifice, अब्रुवन् spoke. 
1::39::9::काकुत्स्थ O Kakutstha, king Sagara, पर्वणि on this auspicious Parvan day, अयं यज्ञियाश्व: this sacrificial horse, वेगेन quickly, अपनीयते forcibly is being taken away, हर्तारम् the thief, जहि slay him, हयश्च horse, उपनीयताम्  be brought back.
1::39::10::एतत् यज्ञच्छिद्रम् this is a flaw (hole) to sacrifice, न: सर्वेषाम् for all of us, अशिवाय भवेत् will be inauspicious, तत् for that reason, राजन् O king, क्रतु: this sacrifice, अच्छिद्र: without flaw (hole for leakage ), यथा in whichever manner, भवेत् be, तथा in that manner, क्रियताम् let it be done.
1::39::11::पार्थिव: that king, उपाध्यायवच: words of officiating priests, श्रुत्वा having heard, तस्मिन् सदसि in that sacrificial assembly, षष्टिं sixty, पुत्रसहस्राणि thousand sons, एतत् वाक्यम् these words, उवाच ह spoke.
1::39::12::परुषर्षभा: O Best among men, पुत्रा: O Sons, रक्षसाम् for rakshsas, गतिम् access, न पश्यामि   हि I do not see indeed, महाक्रतु: this great sacrifice, मन्त्रपूतै: consecrated by mantras, महाभागै: by eminent and pious priests, आस्थित: is presided.
1::39::13::पुत्रका: O Sons, तत् for that reason, गच्छत you may go, व: for you, भद्रम् auspiciousness, अस्तु happen, समुद्रमालिनीम् garlanded by oceans, सर्वाम् entire, पृथिवीम् earth, अनुगच्छत search for.  
1::39::14::पुत्रा: O Sons, एकैकयोजनम् yojana by yojana, विस्तारम् length and breadth of earth, अधिगच्छत you may acquire, मम my, आज्ञया by command, तं हयहर्तारम् that thief of horse, मार्गमाणा: while search for, तुरगसन्दर्श: finding the horse, यावत् तावत् till such time, मेदिनीम् earth, खनत excavate. 
1::39::15::दीक्षित: having been initiated into the sacrifice, अहम् I, पौत्रसहित: with my grandson, Anshuman, सोपाध्यायगण: together with spiritual preceptors, यावत्तुरगदर्शनम् till such time the horse is found, इह here, स्थास्यामि I will stay here, व: to you, भद्रम् safety be.
1::39::16::राम O Rama, इति उक्ता: thus spoken, महाबला: highly powerful, राजपुत्रा: princes, हृष्टमनस: with joyful hearts, पितु: their father's, वचनयन्त्रिता: commanded by the words, महीतलम् about earth, जग्मु: departed.  
1::39::17::परुषव्याघ्र O Tiger among men, एकैक: each one of them, योजनायामविस्तारम् one yojana of length and width, धरणीतलम् ground, वज्रस्पर्शसमै: resembling the touch (sharpness) of diamonds, नखै: with their nails, बिभिदु: broke (dug up).  
1::39::18::रघुनन्दन O Rama, अशनिकल्पै: similar to thunderbolt, शूलै: with lances, सुदारुणै: which were dreadful, हलैश्च with plough, भिद्यमाना being broken, वसुमती earth, ननाद emanated sounds.
1::39::19::राघव O Rama, मथ्यमानानाम् being churned, नागानाम् of serpents, असुराणां च of demons, राक्षसानां च of rakshasas, सत्त्वानाम् of all the creatures, दुर्धर्ष: intolerable, निनद: अभवत् sound emerged. 
1::39::20::रघुनन्दन O Rama, वीरा: heroes, योजनानाम् of yojanas, षष्टिं सहस्राणि sixty thousand, धरणीम् earth, अनुत्तमम् great, रसातलम् nether world, बिभिदु: excavated. 
1::39::21::नरशार्दूल O Foremost of men, नृपात्मजा: sons of Sagara, पर्वतसम्बाधम् filled with mountains, जम्बूद्वीपम् Jambudweepa, एवम् in this way, खनन्त: while excavating, सर्वत: everywhere, परिचक्रमु: moved around.  
1::39::22::तत: afterwards, सगन्धर्वा: together with gandharvas, सासुरा: with asuras, सपन्नगा: with serpents, देवा: gods, सर्वे all, सम्भ्रान्तमनस: with bewildered minds, पितामहम् lord Brahma, उपागमन् approached.
1::39::23::परमसन्त्रस्ता: highly agitated, विषण्णवदना: with meloncholic faces, ते they, महात्मानम् magnanimous, पितामहम् Brahma, प्रसाद्य having propitiated him, इदं वचः these words, ऊचु: spoke. 
1::39::24::भगवन् O Venerable one, सर्वा entire, पृथिवी earth, सगरात्मजै: by sons of Sagara, खन्यते is being excavated, तलवासिन: those living in the lower worlds, बहव: many, महात्मान: great  beings, हन्यन्ते are being killed.
1::39::25::अयम् this one, अस्माकं our, यज्ञहर: destroyer of our sacrifice, अनेन by him, अश्व: horse, अपनीयते is being stolen away, इति saying so, ते सगरात्मजा: those sons of Sagara, सर्वभूतानि all beings, निघ्नन्ति are slaying.
