1::28::1:: After performing the purificatory rites, Rama received the weapons with a cheerful face. In the way Rama said to Viswamitra.
1::28::2:: O venerable one, having received these weaponsI have become unassailable even by the celestials. O best of ascetics, May I know the way to withdraw these weapons.
1::28::3::To these words spoken by Rama, maharshi Viswamitra who was patient practitioner of vows and pure taught the withdrawl mantra.
1::28::4::O Rama the descendant of Raghu, receive from me the effulgent weapons who are the sons of Bhrusasva and who are capable of changing forms at will. They are  Satyavanta, Satyakirti, Dhrishta, Rabhasa, Pratiharatara, Paranmukha (turned back wards), Avanmukha (turned downwards), Lakshaksha, Vishama, Drudhanabha and Sunabha, Dasaksha, Satavaktra, Dasasheersha and Satodara, Padamanabha and Mahanabha, Dundunabha and Sunabhaka, Jyotisha, Krusanam, both Nairasya and  Vimala, Yogandhara, Haridradaitya, Prasamana, Sarchirmali, Dhri, Mali, Vrtiimanta, also Ruchira, Pitrusaumanasa, bothVidhuta Makara, Karaveera Kara, Dhana, Dhanya, Kama Roopa, Kamaruchi, Moha, also Avarana, Jrumbhaka, Sarvanabha, also Santhana and Varuna. You are worthy of receiving these weapons. May you prosper.  
1::28::5::Certainly said Rama, and with a delighted heart received the astras. Some of the astra devatas were coat black, some like smoke, some resembled rays of Sun or Moon. Assuming corporal forms, with shining, divine bodies, those weapons the their bodies bent down and palms folder they spoke to Rama in a gentle voice: O tiger among men, here we are, What can we do for you?
1::28::6::Rama spoke to them (astra devatas) saying, Reside in my mind and render assistance  in times of need. Now you can go according to your will.
1::28::7::Thereafter those devatas having said, Be it so, circumambulated Rama, took leave of him and returned to their respective abodes from where they had come.
1::28::8::After having acquired the knowledge of the weapons Rama addressed maharshi Viswamitra in gentle and soft words while walking along with him.
1::28::9:: From this side of the mountain, not  faroff from here stand shining and goodlooking trees resembling clouds. It is replete scattered with animals, pleasing to the mind and extremely beautiful. It is adorned with various kinds of birds singing sweetly. What could be this? I am very curious to know.
1::28::10::O best of acetics, I think we have come out of that  awesome (horripilating) forest because of the pleasant feeling experienced in this region. Whose hermitage is this? O Revered one tell me.
1::28::11::O great ascetic, O venerable brahmana, from where do those slayers of brahmanas, doers of cruel acts, wickedminded and sinful persons come from and cause obstacles to your sacrifice? Where is that sacrificial place required to be protected by me? Where are these rakshasas required to be slain? O best of ascetics, I would like to hear from you. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे अष्टाविंशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the twentyeighth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
