1::18::1::Completed by the magnanimous king (Dasaratha). The aswamedha and putreshti sacrifices, the devatas received their share of havis and returned to their respective  abodes.
1::18::2::Having completed the prescribed vows (in respect of aswamedha), king Dasaratha together with his queens returned to the city of Ayodhya accompanied by his attendants, army and chariots.
1::18::3::Having been honoured by the king (Dasaratha) in a be fitting manner, the highly pleased lords of the earth (kings) made obeisance to the best of sages (Vasishta) and returned to their own countries.
1::18::4::When the army of the kings left the city (Ayodhya) for their own, the armed forces shone bright and cheerfl.
1::18::5::After the departure of the rulers, the exalted king Dasaratha preceded by the foremost of brahmins entered the city (of Ayodhya).
1::18::6::Having been duly honoured by king Dasaratha, sage Rsyasringa with his wife Santa  accompanied by the wise king Romapada and his followers set out for his country.
1::18::7::When they (guests) all departed in this manner, Dasaratha with his desire fulfilled, his thought centred on begetting sons lived happily.
1::18::8::Six seasons (one year) passed after the completion of the sacrifice. In the twelfth month of Chaitra on the ninth day (of the bright fortnight), with Aditi as presiding deity when the star Punarvasu was in the ascendent and the five planets Sun, Mars, Saturn, Jupiter and Venus, were exalted in their own house in karkata lagna, when Brihaspati was in conjunction with the Moon, Kausalya gave birth to a son: a facet of Visnu, Lord of the entire universe who received obeisance from all the worlds and was adorned with all auspicious signs, the venerable one  to perpetuate the Ikshvaku race.
1::18::9::Kausalya glowed with the undiminished lustre of her son, just as Aditi with  her son Indra, the foremost among the gods and  the wielder of thunder.
1::18::10::As an incarnation of the  fourth part of Visnu, imbued with all virtues, and armed with truth Bharata was born to Kaikeyi.
1::18::11::Sumitra gave birth to Lakshmana and Satrughna who were heroic, skilled in the use of all weapons and endowed with the facets of Visnu.
1::18::12::Bharata endowed with pure intellect was born in meena lagna when pushya was in the ascendant. Lakshmana and Satrughna were born in karkata lagna with the star aslesha .
1::18::13::Four worthy sons were successively born to the noble king (Dasaratha), endowed with all virtuous, resembling purvabhadra and uttarabhadra  stars in brightness.
1::18::14::The gandharvas sang melodiously. Groups of apsaras danced. Celestial kettledrums were sounded. Flowers were showered from the sky. Men througed to Ayodhya to witness the festivities.
1::18::15::The highways were crowded with men, thronged by actors and dancers. The voices of singers, performers on different instruments, eulogists and genealogists reverberated.
1::18::16::The king distributed deserving gifts to priests, euologists and genealogists. He gave brahmins in charity thousands of cows and other valuables.
1::18::17:: After a lapse of eleven days, the naming ceremony was performed. Highly delighted preceptor Vasishta named Kausalya's son Rama, Kaikeyi's son Bharata, one son of Sumitra, Lakshmana and the other Satrughna.
1::18::18::Brahmins as well as inhabitants of the city and rural areas were feasted. (Dasaratha) bestowed on brahmins unlimited and abundant jewels in charity. The rites at the time of birth and all other rites (associated with the newborn) were duly performed.
1::18::19::Among them, Rama like the exalted flag, became dear to his father like Brahma he was highly respected by all living beings.
1::18::20::All the sons (of Dasaratha) became wellversed in the Vedas. They were heroic, endowed with knowledge  and virtues and were devoted to the welfare of the people.
1::18::21::Among them  the highly lustrous and truly mighty Rama was stainless (in character). He was auspicious to the entire world like the Moon.
1::18::22::Accepted as skilled in mounting elephants, riding horses, driving chariots and also in archery, he was always emgaged in the service of his parents.
1::18::23::Right from his very childhood Lakshmana, an enhancer of fortune, always remained very  attached to his eldest brother Rama, the delight of the world.
1::18::24::Lakshmana,  possessed of fortune, was the dearest to his brother than his own body. As though he was his life without.
1::18::25::Rama, the greatest among men would not sleep without Lakshmana's company. He would not partake even the choicest food minus to him.
1::18::26::Whenever Raghava (Rama) went hunting into the forest, riding the horse, Lakshmana used to follow him holding bow and arrows (in his hand).
1::18::27::In a similar manner Satrughna, younger brother of Lakshmana, became dearer than his own life to Bharata. Similarly, Bharata also was dear to Satrughna.
1::18::28::With his very fortunate sons, Dasaratha was highly pleased like Brahma was with the gods.
1::18::29::All his sons were enriched  with knowledge and endowed  with all virtues. They were modest, renowned, omniscient and farsighted. Dasaratha rejoiced at the sight of those glorious sons with such faculties and looked like Brahma, Lord of the worlds.
1::18::30:: They (like) tigers among men, were fond of the study of the Vedas  and were always engaged in the service of their parents. They were also proficient in the science of archery.
1::18::31::Then the virtuous king Dasaratha deliberated with his priests and kinsmen about the marriage of his sons.
1::18::32::While the nobleminded king was thus deliberating in the midst of his counsellors,  there arrived the effulgent ascetic Viswamitra. 
1::18::33::Desirous of seeing the king (Dasaratha) he accosted the doorkeepers, saying Inform the king quickly about the arrival of Viswamitra, the son of Gadhi born in the line of Kusika.
1::18::34::On hearing those words (of Viswamitra) all of them prompted by fear because of left for the royal apartment with excited minds and hurried steps.
1::18::35:: Having reached the royal hall, they reported to the king (Dasaratha), descendant of the Ikshvakus about the arrival of sage Viswamitra.
1::18::36::Having heard their words, Dasaratha in great joy went forth together with his preceptors to receive him like Indra receiving Brahma. 
1::18::37::Seeing Viswamitra, shining with the power of his penance fulfilled the king with a cheerful countenance made offerings with due respect.  
1::18::38:: Viswamitra received the offerings as ordained in the scriptures and enquired from the king about the welfare and prosperity of his kingdom.
1::18::39:: The exceedingly virtuous sage Viswamitra enquired from the king about the treasury welfare of his subjects living in cities and villages, and the well being of his friends and relatives.
1::18::40::Are the tributary kings submissive to you? Have you conquered your enemies? Are the rites for propitiating gods and the services to humanity  performed rightly?
1::18::41::The foremost of ascetis, Viswamitra approached Vasishta and all other distinguised sages following the protocal and enquired about their welfare.
1::18::42::All of them with gladdened hearts entered the royal palace and sat down, in accordance with their position after having been duly honoured by the king. 
1::18::43::Then the munificent king, very much (at Viswamitra's arrival) pleased offered him a happy hospitality and spoke:
1::18::44::O great sage, welcome to you Your arrival, to me, is like nectar (to a human being), rains to the parched land, birth of a son to the childless through his worthy wife, recovery of lost properity and festive joy in a great achievemnt. 
1::18::45::Earlier you were rajarshi, a warrior sage. By your austerities you have obtained the brilliance that lends radiance even to the Sun and the Moon you have gained the status of a brahmrshi. In several ways you are worthy of my worship.                                                                                                                 
1::18::46::O Brahman your arrival has caused surprise to me. It has conferred great purity on me. O Lord by your very presence here, I feel I haved acquired the merits of a          pilgrimage.
1::18::47::Be pleased to tell me the purpose of your visit. I desire to be given the privilege of doing service to achieve your object. 
1::18::48:: O Viswamitra you need not hesitatate to tell me what ought to be performed. I shall accomplish that act in every possible special way. You are a god to me. 
1::18::49::O Brahmin I have attained this high foutune today. My great merit has been realised as a result of your arrival.
1::18::50:: On hearing the words spoken in such an humble manner by the prudent king words pleasing  to the mind and to the ears, the great rishi of  celebrated virtues and fame, of sterling qualities experienced deep delight.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे अष्टादशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the eighteenth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
1::18::51::
