1::69::1::With the passing of the night king Dasaratha, accompanied by spiritual preceptors and relatives said to Sumantra:
1::69::2::Let all the officers of the treasury furnished with enough wealth and a variety gems go in advance under escort.
1::69::3::Let the four divisions of the army from all the four quarters with elegant palanquins proceed at my command.
1::69::4::Let brahmins like Vasishta, Vamadeva, Jabali, Kasyapa, Markandeya endowed with long life, and rishi Katyayana depart in advance. My chariot be yoked and kept ready. Let there be no delay. The messengers (from Janaka) are hastening me up.
1::69::5::While the Indra among kings (Dasaratha) proceeded with the sages, the four divisions of the army followed them at the command of the king.
1::69::6::Covering the distance in four days, they arrived in the country of the Videhas. The fortunate king Janaka, having heard about these tidings, made arangements to extend to them reverential hospitality.
1::69::7::King Janaka approached the aged ruler of men, Dasaratha, and experienced great delight.
1::69::8::Filled with joy the best of men (Janaka) addreseed the best of men Dasaratha: O Descendant of the Raghus, O Great king welcome I am fortunate to have you, you will experience the pleasure of both your sons having won the  reward for their prowess.  
1::69::9::Most brilliant and adorable ascetic Vasishta surrounded by the foremost of brahmins like Indra by the gods has also arrived by the grace of God. 
1::69::10::By the grace of god, I have overcome all impediments. By the grace of God my race  has been honoured through alliance with the house of the Raghus distinguished by their valour.
1::69::11::O Foremost of men, O Best of kings, tomorrow at dawn after the completion of the sacrifice, you should perform the marriage with approval by the sages.
1::69::12::At these words, the most eloquent king (Dasaratha) made his reply in the midst of sages:
1::69::13::I have heard that acceptance of a gift from the righteous is a pleasure. So we will act upon your word. 
1::69::14::Janaka was filled with extreme admiration to hear one who was truthful, righteous and famous (this Dasaratha).
1::69::15::Thereupon hosts of sages in one another's company, filled with great delight spent the night comfortably.
1::69::16::The king (Dasaratha) was greatly delighted on being reunited with his sons Rama and Lakshmana. Honoured by Janaka, he spent the night with supreme satisfaction.
1::69::17::Mighty philosopher Janaka also performed the  sacrificial rites and spent the night (there where the sacrificial ceremony was performed) with both his daughters.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकोनसप्ततितमस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the sixtynineth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
