1::54::1::O Rama when sage Vasishta did not consent to part with the wishfulfilling cow, Viswamitra dragged Sabala by force.
1::54::2::O Rama when she was being taken away by the powerful king the distressed Sabala thus reflected choked with sorrow:
1::54::3::I am being carried away by attendants of the king in this greatly distressed and pitiable condition. Have I been abandoned by the magnanimous Vasishta?
1::54::4::What harm have I done to the pious maharshi, a compassionate soul? Why does he  forsake me, his auspicious one, despite my innocence and devotion?    
1::54::5::O Destroyer of enemies thus thinking and repeatedly sighing, that cow shook off those attendants who were in hundreds and ran towards the feet of the illustrious Vasishta with the speed of the wind.
1::54::6::Lowing and moaning, standing before Vasishta, roaring like thunder and of kettledrum, Sabala said:
1::54::7::O Brahma's son O Venerable one you have abandoned me? For what reason the servants of the king are taking me away from you? 
1::54::8::Addressed thus, Bramharshi said to Sabala, like to  a sister whose heart is afflicted with sorrow:
1::54::9::O Sabala I am not forsaking you. You have done me no harm. This highly powerful king is forcibly carrying you away from me.
1::54::10::I am no match for his strength, especially he is a king. Being king, he is a warrior, powerful and lord of the earth.
1::54::11::He has an entire akshauhini composed of horses, chariots, elephants and banners. Hence he is stonger.
1::54::12::To these words of  brahmarshi Vasishta armed with immeasurable power, Sabala, who knew the use of words, replied with humility:
1::54::13::O Best of brahmins it is held that the strength of a kshatriya is no greater than a brahmin's. A brahmin possesses great strength his strength is divine. It is greater than that of a kshatriya.
1::54::14::Your power is immeasurable. Even though highly valiant, Viswamitra is not greater than you in strength. Your power is unequalled. 
1::54::15::O Highly fortunate one I am possessed of your brahminic power. Command me. I will destroy the insolent and power of that wickedminded one.
1::54::16::O Rama to this, glorious Vasishta replied: Create an army capable of crushing the enemy power.
1::54::17::Hearing his words Kamadhenu created an army. O Rama her lowing brought into being Paplavas in hundreds who destroyed the entire army of Viswamitra, while he looked on helplessly.
1::54::18::Thereafter the king (Viswamitra), having seen his army thus routed, flew into a fury. Wideeyed with anger, he sat in his chariot and destoyed the Paplavas with various kinds of weapons.
1::54::19::Having seen hundreds of Paplavas crushed by Viswamitra, once again she created out of anger. Sakas mixed with Yavanas.
1::54::20::Sakas mixed with Yavanas, resembling golden filaments possessing brilliance and supreme bravery, covered the earth.
1::54::21::Sakas and Yavanas, armed with swords and lances, clad in yellow apparel, looking  like flaming fire destroyed the entire army.
1::54::22:: Thereafter, most brilliant Viswamitra released weapons. With these weapons, the Yavanas, Kambhojas and Paplavas were scattered.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे चतुष्पञ्चाशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the fiftyfourth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
