1::36::1::While Viswamitra preeminent ascetic among the sages was telling the story (of Ganga) to the heroic Rama and Lakshmana, they extolled it and enquired:
1::36::2::O Brahman sage, this excellent story set in righteousness has been narrated by you. Since you are conversant with the details, you can befittingly tell the story in detail, pertaining to the eldest daughter of king of the mountains and the events that happened in the celestial and mortal worlds
1::36::3::Why does Ganga, the purifier of the worlds overflow the three paths (worlds)? O knower of dharma what deed made, Tripathaga (flowing in three directions) Ganga wellknown in the three worlds as the best (holiest) of all rivers?
1::36::4::Having heard the words of the son of the Kakusthas, Viswamitra, vested with the wealth of asceticism, revealed the complete story in detail in the presence of the sages.
1::36::5::O Rama, in ancient times, great ascetic the blueneck Lord Siva got married to goddess Uma charmed with her beauty he indulged in sexual enjoyment with intense  passion.
1::36::6::O Rama, tormentor of enemies, while Lord Siva was thus absorbed in sexual enjoyment, a hundred (celestial) years passed but no son was born to them.
1::36::7::Then the devatas led by Brahma were exceedingly alarmed. 'Who will be able to bear the power of the offspring if it is born here and now', they reflected.
1::36::8::All devatas approached Siva and paying their obeisance said, O God of the gods engaged in the welfare of all O Mahadeva accept our salutations Be king which you can be (if you will).
1::36::9::O best among the gods, the worlds cannot contain your energy (the son born of your energy) You may engage yourself in penance in the company of Uma in conformity with the Vedas. Retain your energy in your body for the  welfare of the three worlds.
1::36::10::Mahadeva, ruler of the all the worlds, having heard the words of devatas, said Be it so Further: 
1::36::11::Together with Uma I will preserve the semen in my body thereby the devatas and also the earth will have peace.
1::36::12::Who will contain this exceptional vital fluid of mine if shaken from its own place? O best of devatas tell me.
1::36::13::Thus questioned, all the devatas replied to the bearer of the flag with bull as its symbol (Siva), saying, The earth will contain the disturbed vital fluid. 
1::36::14::Thus replied by the devatas, the god of the gods released his vital fluid  on earth. It pervaded the entire earth including mountains and forests. 
1::36::15::Then, the devatas said to the firegod, Enter this energy (creative power) related to Rudra followed by the windgod.
1::36::16::That energy pervaded by fire was transformed into the White Mountain. It turned the forest of reeds (Saravana) (blazing) like the fire or the Sun. From that fire was born the glorious Kartikeya.
1::36::17::Thereafter highly pleased with the event the devatas along with the saints worshipped Siva and goddess Uma with deep devotion.
1::36::18::Rama thereafter Uma, daughter of the mountain (Himavan) with her eyes red with anger cursed all of them:
1::36::19::
1::36::20::From today onwards your wives will become childless cursed Uma. The devatas were cursed this Even the  earth:
1::36::21::O Earth you will assume many forms and become wife of many masters. O evilminded one, you did not want me to bear a son. Having been fouled as a result of my anger, you will not have the pleasure of having  a son, cursed Uma.
1::36::22::The god of the gods (Mahesvara), seeing all the devatas humiliated began to depart in the westerly direction presided over by Varuna.
1::36::23::Mahesvara along with goddess Uma, went north of the Himavat mountain and performed penance on a peak.
1::36::24::O Rama this story of the daughter of the mountain has been narrated to you. Now listen with Lakshmana the tale of the birth of Ganga:इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे षट्त्रिंशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the thirtysixth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
