1::4::1::The divine sage Valmiki, composed in wonderful lines the entire lifestory of Rama who regained his kingdom.
1::4::2::Sage Valmiki composed the Ramayanam in twentyfour thousand verses in six kandas and also Uttarakanda (consisting of five hundred cantos).
1::4::3::The great intellectual and competent Valmiki having composed the Ramayanam including the events of Uttarakanda as well as future events, reflected as to who could translate into performance the epic.
1::4::4::While the highly honoured sage Valmiki was thus pondering over, Kusa and Lava came to him in the garb of ascetics and bowed at his feet.
1::4::5::The sage saw the two illustrious princely brothers, wellversed in dharma and endowed with a sweet voice living in the hermitage.
1::4::6:: Valmiki, the master, having found both Kusa and Lava endowed with intellect and accomplished in the Vedas initiated them into the Ramayana composed by him for the purpose of nourishing the Vedas.
1::4::7::Valmiki who practised religious austerities composed this entire epic named the Ramayana which constitutes the great history of Sita and the killing of Paulastya (Ravana). 
1::4::8::The twin brothers Kusa and Lava, endowed with a melodious voice,  possessed auspicious form and beauty. They were gandharvas in human form. They looked like the two reflected images of Rama. The contents of this epic, apart from being memorable are sweet and suitable for verbal recitation as well as singing. This charming and attractive kavya is fit to be adapted to the three measures of time and to stringed instruments. It possesses seven notes together with various moodsamorous, compassionate, humorous, heroic, fearful and also violent.
1::4::9::These two princes blameless, disciplined and wellversed, committed to memory the whole epic and chanted as instructed in the assembly of rishis, brahmins and saints.
1::4::10::On a particular occasion both the great princes who were dignified and endowed with good features, chanted this great epic in the presence of honoured ascetics who assembled at one place.
1::4::11::All the sages having heard the chanting (of that glorious kavya), experienced great astonishment. Overcome with tears of joy in their eyes, they praised them, exclaiming Excellent, Excellent.
1::4::12::All the sages steeped in dharma, pleased with them, praised the admirable Kusa and Lava as they sang. 
1::4::13::How melodious is this chanting, especially the verses Though it (the events) had happened long ago, it is described as if it is happening at the present moment, exclaimed the audience.
1::4::14::They both chanted in perfect unison in theme and passion, with their charming melodious voice endowed with the rich notes of music (sadja and other).
1::4::15::Praised in this manner by the great sages commendable for their austerities, they chanted even with greater charm and sweetness.
1::4::16::Pleased with the singing, one of the sages seated in the assembly presented them a pitcher. Another sage of renown got so delighted that he gave them garments. 
1::4::17::This wonderful epic chronologically composed and completed by the sage (Valmiki),  is the supreme source for poetry.
1::4::18::The two singers, proficient in all kinds of notes recited the epic in the streets and on the principal roads. It was pleasing to hear for all. It gave long life and prosperity to the listeners. People admired them. Once Rama happened to see them. 
1::4::19::Thereafter, Rama, the destroyer of enemies, having invited the two brothers Kusa and Lava who deserved honour. He brought them to his royal palace and extended respectful hospitality. 
1::4::20::Rama, the tormentor of enemies, surrounded by his ministers and brothers occupied the splendid golden throne.
1::4::21::Then selfpossessed Rama, having seen those very handsome brothers (Kusa and Lava), addressed Lakshmana, Satrughna and Bharata, saying:
1::4::22::Listen to this story sung by both of them, portraying excellent sense and words. Having said this, Rama urged the singers with the lustre of devatas to commence.
1::4::23::Both of them, with good and ample voice, chanted the kavya in a distinctly meaningful way. Tuning their stringed instruments, they sang melodiously and engagingly. 
1::4::24::The chanting of the kavya in the assembly of men comforted the sense of hearing. The listeners rejoiced in their mind, heart and the whole being. 
1::4::25::Addressing the assembly of men Rama said Both Kusa and Lava, even though ascetics, are endowed with the attributes of royalty. Eventhough they are singers, they are ascetics. This is even conducive to my wellbeing. Listen to the meaningful story with concentration.
1::4::26::Encouraged by the words of Rama, the two brothers chanted according to marga mode of singing (classical style). Even Rama who was in the assembly desirous of peace, concentrated his mind on that chanting.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे चतुर्थस्सर्ग:।। Thus ends the fourth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana in synopsis of the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.    
