1::3::1::Hearing the entire story of Rama from the intellecual Narada, the righteous (Valmiki) sought to know clearly more about the history of Rama endowed  with wisdom.
1::3::2::Having performed achamana, Valmiki seated on kusha grass with folded palms, searched for the course of past events in the history of Rama by his power of penance.
1::3::3::By the power of his penance, the holy sage visualised clearly Rama, Lakshmana and Sita, king Dasaratha, his wives and his kingdom and all that they had observed, experienced, endeavoured during the course of events. He also visualised clearly their laughter and conversation exactly as in real life.
1::3::4::All that was acquired by truthful Rama, Lakshmana and wife Sita as the third person when they were moving in the Dandakaranya forest, was visualised.
1::3::5::With the power of yoga, the righteous (Valmiki) saw clearly, like an amalaka fruit in the palm of the hand the entire course of events that happened in the past relating to Rama.
1::3::6::Highly resplendent Valmiki, having visualised the story (of Rama), with his power of penance and blending the merits of attainment of worldly prosperity and pleasures together with the detailed description of the merit of righteousness as an end and aim, like an ocean filled with gems, got ready to compose the story of delightful Rama which regales everybody's ears.
1::3::7::The divine sage, composed the history of Rama born in the race of Raghu, just as it was related by the illustrious sage Narada in the past. 
1::3::8::(He described) the birth of Rama, his great prowess, benevolence, pleasant disposition, forbearance, handsome looks and his adherence to truth.
1::3::9::(He described) Rama's association with Viswamitra, a variety of wonderful stories, the breaking of the great bow and his (Rama's) marriage with Janaki.
1::3::10::(He described) Rama's altercation with Parasurama, his noble qualities, the preparations for his coronation and the wicked nature of Kaikeyi.
1::3::11::(He described) the obstacles to the coronation of Rama, his departure to the forest, the wailing and death of king Dasaratha with sorrow.
1::3::12::(He described) the grief of people of Ayodhya and his (Rama's) abandoning them and his (Rama's) conversation with Guha, the ruler of nishadas, the charioteer (Sumantra)'s return (after leaving Rama in the forest).
1::3::13::(He described) Rama, Lakshmana and Sita ferrying the river Ganges, the visit to holy sage Bharadwaja and the departure to Chitrakuta mountain.
1::3::14::(He described) the making of, and dwelling in, a hut, the arrival of Bharata, Bharata's persuasion to Rama (to return to the kingdom), and Rama's performance the funeral ablution for his father.
1::3::15::(He described) the installation of sandals (of Rama as the symbol of authority),  Bharata is residing at Nandigrama (and his ruling the kingdom from there), Rama's departure for Dandakaranya, and the killing of Viradha.
1::3::16::(He described) Rama's meeting with (sage) Sarabhanga and his arrival at Sutikshna's, Sita's companionship with Anasuya and anointing of fragrant unguents to her body.
1::3::17::(He described) the departure of Rama for Panchavati, the interview with sage Agastya, the  meeting with Jatayu and the appearance of Surpanakha.
1::3::18::(He described) Rama's dialogue with Surpanakha, her disfigurement, the slaughter of Khara and Trisira, and the beginning of efforts by Ravana (to harm Rama).
1::3::19::(He described) the killing of Maricha, the abduction of Sita, Rama's lamentation (over his separation from Sita), and the death of Jatayu.
1::3::20::(He described) Rama's encounter with Kabandha, the viewing of river Pampa, the meeting with Sabari and Hanuman.
1::3::21::(He described) Rama's departure for Rishyamuka mountain, his meeting with Sugriva and the pact of friendship with him, inspiring confidence in him and the combat between Sugriva and Vali.
1::3::22::(He described) the killing of Vali (by Rama), the installation of Sugriva, the mourning of Tara, the waiting (for the search of Sita as per the pact of friendship with Sugriva), and the sojourn on the mountain during the rainy season.
1::3::23::(He described) the anger of Rama, the lion in the race of the Raghus (over the delay by Sugriva), the consolidation of the monkey forces, the despatch of envoys to different directions, the report (about the different places) on earth.
1::3::24::(He described) the delivery of  the ring (to Hanuman by Rama), the entry into the cave of the riksha, the preparations for their fast unto death, and the meeting with Sampati.
1::3::25::(He described) the climbing of Mahendra mountain (by Hanuman), crossing the sea  emergence of Mainaka hill at the command of the lord of ocean.
1::3::26::(He described) the slaughter of (the female demon) Simhika, the viewing of in Lanka from a mountain, the entry into Lanka by night and thereafter, Hanuman's lonely thinking. 
1::3::27::(He described) the view of Ravana and the (aerial chariot), Pushpaka, (by Hanuman), his reaching the hall where liquor is served, sighting of womens' apartments in the royal palace.
1::3::28::(He described) the entry (of Hanuman) into the Ashoka garden, the finding of Sita, the  presentation of the ring (as token of recognition by Hanuman) and the sight of Ravana.
1::3::29::(He described) threatenings of the demonesses, (the narration of) dream by Trijata, Sita presenting chudamani to Hanuman and also the breaking of trees (in the grove by Hanuman).
1::3::30::(He described) the flight of the female demons, the killing of the servants (of Ravana), the seizure of Hanuman and the burning of Lanka (by Hanuman) with a ferocious roar.
1::3::31::(He described) Hanuman crossing the ocean back, forcibly seizing the Madhu forest and enjoying honey, informing Rama about Sita and consoling him and delivering the gem.
1::3::32::(He described) the meeting with the (lord of the) seas, the construction of bridge by Nala, the crossing of the ocean and the seige of Lanka during night.
1::3::33::(He described) the association with Vibhisana, disclosure of the means of destruction (of Ravana), the death of Kumbhakarna, and the killing of Meghanada.
1::3::34::(He described) Ravana's destruction, the reunion with Sita in the enemycity, the coronation of Vibhishana and the sighting of Pushpaka.
1::3::35::(He described) Rama's return to Ayodhya, the reunion with Bharata, the festive occasion of Rama's coronation disbanding the entire forces, keeping his subjects happy and banishing Sita (in the forest).
1::3::36::Divine sage Valmiki composed events yet to happen on this earth in the history of Rama in Uttarakanda.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे तृतीयस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the third sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana in synopsis of the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
