1::17::1::विष्णौ when Vishnu, सुमहात्मन: of the high minded, राज्ञ: king's, पुत्रत्वम् filialrelationship, गते(सति) having become, भगवान् स्वयम्भू: selfborn lord, Brahma, सर्वा: addressing all, देवता: devatas, इदम् these words, उवाच spoke.
1::17::2::सत्यसन्धस्य truthful to promise, वीरस्य of the heroic, सर्वेषाम् नः for all of us, हितैषिण: wishing  the welfare, विष्णो: of Vishnu, सहायान् helpers(as companions), बलिन: strong, powerful and valiant, कामरूपिण: capable of changing forms at their free will, सृजध्वम् create.
1::17::3:: मायाविद: knowers of all kinds of illusions and deceitful tricks, शूरान् च brave, जवे in speed, वायुवेगसमान् equal to the speed of wind, नयज्ञान् knowers of statecraft, बुद्धिसम्पन्नान्  endowed with intellect, विष्णुतुल्यपराक्रमान् equal to Visnu in prowess, असंहार्यान् cannot be withdrawn from their endeavour, उपायज्ञान् knowledgeable in various means and ways of achieving victory namely Sama, Dana, Bheda and Danda, दिव्यसंहननान्वितान् having supernatural bodies, सर्वास्त्रगुणसम्पन्नान् possessed of capabilities in employing  and resisting weapons, अमृतप्राशनानिव resembling those who subsist on Amrita(immortals), (विष्णु)तुल्यपराक्रमान् in prowess equal to Visnu, पुत्रान् sons, मुख्यासु among the chief, अप्सरस्सु च apsarasas, गन्धर्वीणाम् gandharva women, तनूषु च from their bodies, हरिरूपेण in the form of monkeys, सृजध्वम् you may create.
1::17::4::जाम्बवान् by name Jambavan, ऋक्षपुङ्गव: foremost of bears, पूर्वमेव previously, मया by me, सृष्ट: was created, जृम्भमाणस्य मम when I was yawning, वक्त्रात् from my face, सहसा suddenly, अजायत was created.
1::17::5::भगवता by that Brahma, तथा in that manner, उक्ता: having been instructed, ते all of them, तत् प्रतिश्रुत्य having agreed, एवम् in this manner, वानररूपिण: those assuming the form of monkeys, पुत्रान् sons, जनयामासु: gave birth.
1::17::6::महात्मान: the distinguished, ऋषयश्च rishis, सिद्धविद्याधरोरगा siddhas, vidhyadharas and uragas, चारणा: charanas, वीरान् heroic, वनचारिण: dwellers in the woods, सुतान् sons, ससृजु: procreated.
1::17::7::इन्द्र: Indra, महेन्द्राभम् resembling Mahendra mountain, ऊर्जितम् having  body of mighty strength, वालिनम् by name Vali, वानरेन्द्रम् chief of monkeys, जनयामास gave birth to, तपताम् among those causing heat, वर: great, तपन: Sun, सुग्रीवम् Sugriva (begot).
1::17::8::बृहस्पतिस्तु Brihaspati, सर्ववानरमुख्यानाम्  among all monkey chiefs, अनुत्तमम् with none to surpass, बुद्धिमन्तम् highly intelligent, तारम् नाम by name Tara, महाहरिम् great monkey,	अजनयत् gave birth.
1::17::9::श्रीमान् glorious, गन्धमादन: by name Gandhamadana, वानर: monkey, धनदस्य Kubera's, सुत: son, विश्वकर्मा Viswakarma, नलं नाम by name Nala, महाहरिम् great monkey, अजनयत् begot.
1::17::10::पावकस्य Agni's (the fire god), सुत: son, श्रीमान् prosperous , अग्निसदृशप्रभ: equal to Agni in brightness, नील: Neela, तेजसा by energy, यशसा by fame, वीर्यात् due to prowess, वानरान् other monkeys, अत्यरिच्यत surpassed. 
1::17::11::रूपद्रविणसम्पन्नौ endowed with wealth of beauty, अश्विनौ Aswini devatas, स्वयं रूपसम्मतौ esteemed because of their beauty, मैन्दं च Mainda, द्विविदं चैव Dvivida, जनयामासतु: procreated.
1::17::12::वरुण: Varuna, सुषेणं by name Sushena, वानरर्षभम् monkey warrior, जनयामास created, पर्जन्यस्तु Parjanya, महाबलम् possessed of great strength, शरभम् Sarabha, जनयामास begot.
1::17::13::श्रीमान् dignified and graceful, वीर्यवान् endowed with prowess(wisdom andcourage), वज्रसंहननोपेत: with his body as hard as diamond, जवे in speed, वैनतेयसम: equalling Garuda, हनुमान् नाम named Hanuman, मारुतस्य आत्मज: son of Vayu, Windgod, Vayu.
1::17::14::दशग्रीववधे in the matter of slaying Ravana, रता: desirous, अप्रमेयबला: men of immeasurable strength, विक्रान्ता: courageous, कामरूपिण: capable of assuming different forms at will, बहुसाहस्रा: in many thousands, ते वीरा: those warriors, सृष्टा: were created.
1::17::15:: मेरुमन्दरसङ्काशा: similar to Meru and Mandara mountains, वपुष्मन्त: endowed with bodies, महाबला: great warriors, ऋक्षवानरगोपुच्छा: bears,monkeys, monkeys with cowtails, क्षिप्रमेव quickly, अभिजज्ञिरे came into being.
1::17::16::यस्य देवस्य for whichever god, यत् रूपम् whatever form, वेष: form of dress, पराक्रम:च prowess also, य: तस्य तस्य  for that respective God, सुत: sons, पृथक् separately, तेनसमः      similar to his procreator, अजायत was born.  
1::17::17::सम्मतविक्रमा: men of highlyhonoured valour, केचित् वानरा: some Monkeys, गोलाङ्गूलीषु च from female monkeys with tails, उत्पन्ना: were born, तथा similarly, ऋक्षीषु from female bears, किन्नरीषु च female kinnaras, जाता: were created.
1::17::18::देवा: devatas, महर्षिगन्धर्वा: great rishis, gandharvas, तार्क्ष्या: garudas,यक्षा: yakshas, यशस्विन:   renowned, नागा: serpants, किम्पुरूषाश्चैव kimpurushas,सिद्धविद्याधरोरगा: siddhas, vidyadharas, uragas, बहव: many, हृष्टा: pleased, तत्र there, मुख्यासु among the principal, अप्सरस्सु apsarasas, तथा and, विद्याधरीषु च among female vidhyadaris, नागकन्यासु in daughters of nagas, तथा and, गन्धर्वीणाम् of female gandhrvas, तनूषु च in bodies सुमहाकायान् of gigantic physique, वनचारिण: forest wanderers, सर्वान् all, वानरान् monkeys, सहस्रश: in thousands, जनयामासु: gave birth. 
1::17::19::कामरूपबलोपेता: (all these monkeys were endowed )with the powers to assume any form at free will and possessed strength, यथाकामम् freely, विचारिण: wanderers, दर्पेण च in arrogance, बलेन च by prowess, सिंहशार्दूलसदृशा: like unto lions and tigers.
1::17::20::सर्वे all, शिलाप्रहरणा: could strike with rocks as weapons, सर्वे all, पादपयोधिन: they could fight with trees, सर्वे all, नखदंष्ट्रायुधा: used nails and teeth as weapon, सर्वे all, सर्वास्त्रकोविदा: skilled in the use of all weapons.
1::17::21::शैलेन्द्रान् mountains, विचालयेयु: could move, स्थिरान् द्रुमान् deeprooted trees, भेदयेयु: could break, वेगेन with speed, सरितां पतिम् the lord of the rivers, समुद्रम् Samudra, क्षोभयेयु: could cause disturbance.
1::17::22::पद्भ्याम् with their feet, क्षितिम् this earth, दारयेयु: forcibly cause cleavage, महार्णवम् mighty ocean, आप्लवेयुः jump with one leap and cross, नभ:स्थलम् the sky, विशेयुश्च could enter, तोयदान् अपि clouds also, गृह्णीयु: could seize.
1::17::23::वने in the forest, प्रव्रजत: sojourning, मत्तान्  arrogant,मातङ्गान् अपि elephants also, गृह्णीयु: could capture, नर्दमाना: while roaring, नादेन with their sounds, विहङ्गमान् birds in flight, पातयेयुः could be made to fall down.
1::17::24::कामरूपिणाम् of those who were capable of assuming any form at will, यूथपानाम् commanders of monkey forces, महात्मनाम् eminent, ईदृशानाम्  of such, हरीणाम् monkeys, शतम् hundred, शतसहस्राणि hundred thousands, प्रसूतानि were born.
1::17::25::ते हरियूथपा: those commanders of monkey forces, हरीणाम् monkeys, प्रधानेषु  among important ones, यूथेषु monkey forces, यूथपश्रेष्ठा: बभूवु: important monkeys were born, वीरान् herioc, हरीन् monkeys, अजनयन् created.
1::17::26::अन्ये some monkeys, सहस्रश: in thousands, ऋक्षवत: abounding in bears, प्रस्थान् plateaus on the top of mountains, अवतस्थु: dwelt, अन्ये some others, नानाविधान् various, शैलान् mountains, काननानि च forests also, भेजिरे inhabited.
1::17::27::ते हरीश्वरा: these leaders of monkey forces, सर्वे all, भ्रातरौ two  brothers, सूर्यपुत्रम् son of Sungod, सुग्रीवम् Sugriva, शक्रपुत्रम् Indra's son, वालिनं च Vali also, नलम् Nala,नीलम् Neela, हनूमन्तम् Hanuman, अन्यान् other, हरियूथपान् leaders of monkey forces, उपतस्थु: dwelt near them.
1::17::28::तार्क्ष्यबलसम्पन्ना: those endowed with the might of Garuda, युद्धविशारदा: wellversed in the art of warfare, ते सर्वे all of them, विचरन्त: moving around, दर्पात् due to arrogance, सिंहव्याघ्रमहोरगान् lions, tigers, mighty serpents, अर्दयन् tormented.
1::17::29::महाबाहु: mighty armed, विपुलविक्रम: one with immense prowess, वाली Vali, तान् सर्वान् all of those, ऋक्षगोपुच्छवानरान् bears, Gopuchhas, monkeys, भुजवीर्येण with the strength of his arms, जुगोप protected.
1::17::30::शूरै: by the valiant, विविधसंस्थानै: having many forms, नानाव्यञ्जनलक्षणै: with various characteristic signs relating to the body and tribes, तै: by them, सपर्वतवनार्णवा with its mountains, forests, seas, इयं पृथिवी this earth, कीर्णा was pervaded.
1::17::31::मेघबृन्दाचलकूटकल्पै: resembling masses of clouds and mountain peaks,महाबलै: by those endowed with immense strength, भीमशरीररूपै: by those having fearful forms and countenances, तै: वानरयूथपालै: by commanders of  the monkey forces, भू: earth, रामसहायहेतो: in order to assist Rama, समावृता बभूव became covered.
