1::67::1::At the words of Janaka, great ascetic Viswamitra said to the king, Let the bow be shown to Rama.
1::67::2:: Thereafter king Janaka said to his feudatories, Let the divine bow adorned with flowers and sandalpaste be brought.
1::67::3:: Commanded by (king) Janaka, the ministers went to the city, put the bow in front of them and carried it as per the orders of the king.
1::67::4::Five thousand mighty stalwarts drew with great difficulty the eightwheeled cart on which the bow was placed in a box.
1::67::5::The counsellors of the king, brought the iron casket containing the bow and said these words to Janaka comparable to a celestial:
1::67::6:: 'O Indra among kings O lord of Mithila here is the great bow, worshipped by all kings, which you intend to show (to Rama)'.
1::67::7::Having heard this, the king with folded hands said to the great soul Viswamitra sitting with the two princes Rama and Lakshmana:
1::67::8::O Brahman in the olden days, this great bow was worshipped by my forefathers. Powerful kings failed to string this bow. 
1::67::9::Hosts of devatas, asuras, rakhasas, kinnaras and great serpents, the best of gandharvas and yakshas, also failed (to wield this bow).
1::67::10::How then can men bend, string, fix the arrow, pull the string and lift it? 
1::67::11:: O Eminent ascetic such heaviest bow is brought here, O Highly accomplished sage show this to the two princes.
1::67::12::Having heard the words of Janaka, the righteous Viswamitra said: O Child O Descendant of Raghu look at this bow.
1::67::13::At the words of the great rishi Viswamitra, Rama opened the casket, beheld  the bow and said:
1::67::14::O Brahmarshi, shall I touch this great bow with my hands lift and string it.
1::67::15:: The king as also the rishi said Be it so. At the words of the sage (Viswamitra), he (Rama) took hold of the bow by the its middle with ease:
1::67::16::Virtuous Rama, the delight of the Raghus, in the presence of several thousands of men fixed the string to the bow and drew it as though with ease.
1::67::17:: Rama, the best among men, righteous and famous lifted the bow. Stringing it with a twang he drew it and broke it into two in the middle.
1::67::18::It generated a loud sound like the clap of thunder, like the trembling of the earth and the splitting of a mountain.
1::67::19::On hearing the sound, except Janaka, Viswamitra and the two raghavas (Rama and Lakshmana) the rest of the people around fell down and fainted.
1::67::20::When the people recovered the king skilful in the use  of words addressed the eminent ascetic  without apprehension with folded palms in the following words: 
1::67::21::O Worshipful one I have witnessed the prowess of Rama, son of Dasaratha. I had not imagined that this marvellous feat could be ever accomplished.
1::67::22:: By receiving Rama, son of Dasaratha, as her husband, my daughter Sita will bring glory to my dynasty. 
1::67::23::O Son of Kausika I announce Sita to be the 'Reward of prowess'. My vow has come true. She is more valuable than my life and fit to be given to Rama.
1::67::24::O Brahmarshi Kausika, be blessed With your consent my ministers will take the chariots to Ayodhya immediately.
1::67::25::That Sita, the reward of prowess is to be given to Rama be reventially communicated in detail to king Dasaratha and he may be conveyed here.
1::67::26:: The welfare of the descendant of Kausika (Rama and Lakshmana) under the protection of sage (Viswamitra) be reported to the king. The king who will be happy to hear this be brought here by swiftfooted men.
1::67::27::The son of Kausika (Viswamitra) also said, So be it. The virtuous king, having consulted his ministers, despatched counsellors to Ayodhya to communicate to king Dasaratha all that had taken place and bring him (to Mithila).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे सप्तषष्टितमस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the sixtyseventh sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
