1::62::1::नरश्रेष्ठ O Foremost of men, रघुनन्दन O Rama, महायशा: illustrious, राजा king, शुन:शेफम् Sunassepha, गृहीत्वा having taken, मध्याह्ने by noon, पुष्करे in the Pushkara, व्यश्राम्यत् rested. 
1::62::2::तस्य as he, विश्रममाणस्य was resting, महायशा: highly famous, शुन:शेफ: Sunassepha, परमातुर: greately aggrieved, पुष्करक्षेत्रम् sacred Pushkara, आगम्य having approached, ऋषिभि:सार्धम्  in the company of other sages, तप्यन्तम् performing austerities, मातुलम् maternal uncle,  विश्वामित्रम् Visvamitra, ददर्श ह beheld.
1::62::3::तृष्णया with thirst, श्रमेण च and fatigue, विवर्णवदन: with discoloured face, दीन: piteous, आशु immediately, मुने: sage's, अङ्के lap, पपात fell, इदम् these, वाक्यम् words, उवाच ह spoke.
1::62::4::सौम्य O Gentle man, मुनिपुङ्गव O Preeminent among ascetics, मे to me, माता mother, नास्ति does no exist, पिता father, न not, ज्ञातय: agnate relations, बान्धवा: relatives, कुत: where?, माम् me, धर्मेण in accordance with righteousness, त्रातुम् to protect, अर्हसि behoves of you.
1::62::5::मुनिश्रेष्ठ O Best among ascetics, त्वम् you, सर्वेषाम् to everybody, त्राता हि protector, त्वम् you, भावन: हि promoter of others' welfare, राजा king, कृतकार्य: fulfilling the purpose, स्यात् become, अहम् I, दीर्घायु: one who has long life, अव्यय: imperishable, अनुत्तमम् great, तप: austerities, तप्त्वा having performed, स्वर्गलोकम् heaven, उपाश्नीयाम् I may enjoy.
1::62::6::अनाथस्य an orphan as i am, मे to me, त्वम् you, भव्येन with auspicious, चेतसा mind, नाथ: lord, भव be, धर्मात्मन् O virtuous one, पिता father, पुत्रमिव like son, किल्बिषात् from sin, त्रातुम् to protect, अर्ह्रसि behoves of you. 
1::62::7::महातपा: mighty ascetic, विश्वामित्र: Viswamitra, तस्य his, तत् बहुविधम् वचनम् those different kinds of words, श्रुत्वा having listened, सान्त्वयित्वा after consoling him, पुत्रान् addressing his sons, इदम् this word, उवाच spoke.
1::62::8::शुभार्थिन: men desiring auspiciousness, पितर: parents, यत्कृते for whichever reason, परलोकहितार्थाय for your wellbeing in other worlds, पुत्रान् sons, जनयन्ति begetting, तस्य for that, अयम् काल: the proper time, आगत: has come.
1::62::9::मुनिसुत: son of sage, अयम् this, बाल: young boy, मत्त: from me, शरणम् refuge, इच्छति is  strongly desiring, पुत्रका: O Sons, अस्य for him, जीवितमात्रेण by mere offering of life, प्रियम् dear act, कुरुत you may do.
1::62::10::सर्वे all of you, सुकृतकर्माण: have done virtuous deeds, सर्वे all of you, धर्मपरायणा: are engaged in the observance of righteousness, नरेन्द्रस्य for the king, पशुभूता: becoming sacrificial animals, अग्ने for Agni, तृप्तिम् satisfaction, प्रयच्छत give.
1::62::11::शुनशेफ: Sunassepha, नाथवान् च will have a protector, यज्ञश्च sacrifice also, अविघ्नत: without hindrance, भवेत् will become, देवता: devatas, तर्पिता: gratified, स्यु: will become, मम my, वच: च words also, कृतम् will be done.
1::62::12::नरश्रेष्ठ O Best of men, मधुच्छन्दादय: Madhuchanda and others, सुता: sons, मुने: ascetics's, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा having listened, साभिमानम् with selfesteem, सलीलम् with ease, इदम् these words, अब्रुवन् spoke.
1::62::13::विभो O Lord, आत्मसुतान् ones own sons, हित्वा abandoning, अन्यसुतम् other's son, कथम् how, त्रायसे you rescue, भोजने in partaking, श्वमांस इव like the flesh of dog, अकार्यमिव as if a prohibited act, पश्याम: we find.  
1::62::14::मुनिपुङ्गव: eminent ascetic, तेषाम् पुत्राणाम् of those sons', तद् वचनम् those words, श्रुत्वा having heard, क्रोधसंरक्तनयन: with eyes reddened with anger, व्याहर्तुम् to speak, उपचक्रमे commenced.
1::62::15::मद्वाक्यम् my words, अतिक्रम्य having trangressed, धर्मादपि even according to morality, विगर्हितम् censurable, दारुणम् dreadful, रोमहर्षणम् causing the hair to stand on end, इदम् these words, निस्साध्वसम् audacious, प्रोक्तम् have been uttered.
1::62::16::सर्वे all of you, श्वमांसभोजिन: feeding on the flesh of dog, पूर्णं complete, वर्षसहस्रम् thousand years, पृथिव्याम् on this earth, वासिष्ठा: इव like sons of Vasishta, जातिषु in (Mushtika) race, अनुवत्स्यथ shall dwell.
1::62::17::मुनिवर: best of ascetics, पुत्रान् his sons, शाप समायुक्तान् doomed with curse, कृत्वा having made, तथा then, निरामयम् free from pain, रक्षाम् protection, कृत्वा having made, आर्तम् filled with distress, शुन:शेफम् addressing Sunassepha, (इदम् these words), उवाच spoke.
1::62::18::वैष्णवं यूपम् Vaishnava sacrificial post, आसाद्य having reached, पवित्रपाशै: with sacred ropes, आसक्त: having bound with, रक्तमाल्यानुलेपन: bedaubing your body with red sandal paste and adorned with red garlands, वाग्भि: with the hymns, अग्निम् Agni, उदाहर invoke.       
1::62::19::मुनिपुत्रक: O Son of the sage, अम्बरीषस्य Ambarisha's, अस्मिन् यज्ञे in this sacrifice, इमे द्वे these two, दिव्ये sacred, गाथे verses, गायेथा: chant, तत: there after, सिद्धिम् success, अवाप्स्यसि you will achieve.
1::62::20::शुनश्शेफ: Sunassepha, सुसमाहित: with concentration of mind, ते द्वे those two, गाथे verses, गृहीत्वा after securing, राजसिंहम् the lion among kings, तम् अम्बरीषम् that Amabarisha, त्वरया quickly, उवाच ह spoke.
1::62::21::महासत्त्व endowed with great strength, राजसिंह lion among kings, सद: sacrificial assembly, शीघ्रम् without dealy, गच्छावहे we shall both go, राजेन्द्र O Indra of monarchs,  निर्वर्तयस्व perform, दीक्षाम् initiatory rites, समुपाविश take up.
1::62::22::नृपति: king, ऋषिपुत्रस्य sage's son's, तत् वाक्यम् those words, श्रुत्वा having heard, हर्षसमुत्सुक:   rejoiced with delight, अतन्द्रित: promptly, यज्ञवाटम् sacrificial ground, जगाम went.
1::62::23::राजा king, सदस्यानुमते with the consent of officiating priests, तम् that Sunassepha,  पवित्रकृतलक्षणम् forming sacred knots of Kusa grass, रक्ताम्बरम् with red apparel, पशुम् as sacrificial animal, कृत्वा having made, यूपे to the sacrificial post, समबन्धयत् tied.
1::62::24::बद्ध: having been bound, स: मुनिपुत्रक: the son of sage, इन्द्रम् Indra, इन्द्रानुजं चैव Upendra, सुरौ two devatas, अग्य्राभि: with excellent, वाग्भि: words, यथावत् properly, अभितुष्टाव praised.
1::62::25::राघव O Rama, तत: then, रहस्यस्तुतितर्पित: gratified with secret praise, सहस्राक्ष: Indra, प्रीत: pleased, तदा then, शुन:शेफाय for Sunasepha, दीर्घम् long, आयु: life, प्रादात् gave.
1::62::26::नरश्रेष्ठ O Foremost of men, राम Rama, स: राजा च that king also, सहस्राक्षप्रसादजम् through  the grace of Indra, बहुगुणम् several times, यज्ञस्य   of sacrifice, फलम् fruits, समाप्तवान् obtained.
1::62::27::नरश्रेष्ठ O Best among men, धर्मत्मा the righteous, महातपा: mighty ascetic, विश्वामित्र: अपि Visvamitra also, पुष्करेषु in that sacred spot name Pushkara, दशवर्षशतानि thousand years, भूय: again, तेपे continued his austerities.
