1::75::1::दाशरथे son of Dasaratha, राम O Rama, राम O Rama, ते your, वीर्यम् prowess, अद्भुतम् marvellous, श्रूयते is being heard, धनुष: bow's, भेदनं चैव breaking also, निखिलेन completely, मया by me, श्रुतम् heard.
1::75::2::त्वया by you, धनुष: bow's, तत् भेदनम् that breaking, अद्भुतम् astonishing, अचिन्त्यम् च unimaginable, तत् that, श्रुत्वा having heard, अहम् I, अपरम् another, शुभम् auspicious, धनु: bow, गृह्य bringing, अनुप्राप्त: have come here. 
1::75::3::घोरसङ्काशं appearing dreadful, जामदग्न्यम् obtained through Jamadagni, तत् that, इदम् this, महत् mighty, धनु: bow, शरेणैव with arrow, पूरयस्व fill it, स्वबलम् your own prowess, दर्शयस्व show.
1::75::4::राघव O Rama, तत् that, अहम् I, अस्य this, धनुष: bow's, प्रपूरणे in stretching it, ते your, बलम् strength, दृष्ट्वा having seen, वीर्यश्लाघ्यस्य to you acclaimed in prowess, द्वन्द्वयुद्धं a duel combat, प्रदास्यामि shall give. 
1::75::5::तदा then, राजा king, दशरथ Dasaratha, तस्य his, तत् that, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा having heard,  विषण्णवदन: with dejected face, दीन: full of sorrow, प्राञ्जलि: with joined hands, वाक्यम् words, अब्रवीत् spoke. 
1::75::6::क्षत्ररोषात् from anger against kshatriyas, प्रशान्त: quietened,  ब्राह्मण: brahmana, महायशा: highly renowned, बालानाम् of young boys, मम my, पुत्राणाम् sons, अभयम् assurance of security, दातुम् to give, अर्हसि behoves of you.
1::75::7::स्वाध्यायव्रतशालिनाम् resplendent with the study of vedas and observance of vows, भार्गवाणाम् relating to Bhargavas, कुले in the race of, जात: was born, सहास्राक्षे in the name of Indra, प्रतिज्ञाय having vowed, शस्त्रं arms, निक्षिप्तवान् असि have renounced.
1::75::8::स: such, त्वम् you, धर्मपर: one intent on righteousness, भूत्वा by being, काश्यपाय for Kasyapa, वसुन्धराम् this earth, दत्त्वा having given, वनम् forest, उपागम्य having reached, महेन्द्रकृतकेतन: made a residence on the Mahendra mountain.
1::75::9::महामुने O Great ascetic, त्वम् you, मम my, सर्वविनाशाय for total destruction, सम्प्राप्त: arrived,  एकस्मिन् one, रामे Rama, हते if killed, वयम् us, सर्वे all, न जीवामहे will not survive.
1::75::10::दशरथे when Dasaratha, एवम् in this way, ब्रुवति while saying, प्रतापवान् valiant, जामदग्न्य: son of Jamadagni, तद्वाक्यम् those words, अनादृत्यैव disregarding, राममेव Rama only, अभ्यभाषत addressed.
1::75::11::इमे these, द्वे two, धनुषी bows, श्रेष्ठे excellent, दिव्ये celestial, लोकाभिविश्रुते wellknown in the  worlds, दृढे stout, बलवती powerful, मुख्ये best of all, विश्वकर्मणा by Visvakarma, सुकृते are  well made.
1::75::12::नरश्रेष्ठ O Best among men, काकुत्स्थ Rama, यत् which, त्त्वया by you, भग्नं was broken, युयुत्सवे wishing to fight, त्र्यम्बकाय for threeeyed Siva, सुरै: by devatas, अतिसृष्टं was given,  त्रिपुरघ्नम् destroyer of Tripuras, एकम् one (of the two).
1::75::13::दुर्धर्षम् unassailable, इदम् this, द्वितीयम् second bow, सुरोत्तमै: chiefs of celestials, विष्णो: for Visnu, दत्तम् given, काकुत्स्थ born in the race of Kakutsthsa, राम Rama, परमभास्वरम् highly radiant, तत् that, इदम् this, वैष्णवम् pertaining to Visnu, धनु: bow, रौद्रेण धनुषा with the bow of Rudra, समानसारम् equal to its energy.  
1::75::14::तदा then, सर्वा: all, देवता: devatas, शितिकण्ठस्य bluethroated, Siva's, विष्णो: Visnu's, बलाबलनिरीक्षया to ascertain the strengths and weaknesses, पितामहम् grandsire, Brahma, पृच्छन्ति स्म enquired. 
1::75::15::सत्यवताम् among truth speaking ones, वर: foremost, पितामह: grandsire, Brahma, देवतानाम् devatas', अभिप्रायम् intention, विज्ञाय having come to know, तयो: for both of them, विरोधम् quarrel, जनयामास instigated. 
1::75::16::विरोधे in that fight, परस्परजिगीषिणो: each desirous of victory over the other, शितिकण्ठस्य Siva's, विष्णोश्च Visnu's, रोमहर्षणम् causing one's hair to stand on its end, महत् great, युद्धम् battle, अभवत् took place. 
1::75::17::तदा then, हुङ्कारेण with 'Humkara' by Visnu, भीमपराक्रमम् dreadful prowess, शैवं धनु: Siva's bow, जृम्भितं yawned (stretched), अथ thereafter, त्रिलोचन: threeeyed, महादेव: Mahadeva, स्तम्भित: was made motionless.
1::75::18::तदा then, सर्षिसंघै: hosts of sages, सचारणै: with charanas, देवै: devatas, तत्र there, समागम्य having assembled, याचितौ beseeched, तौ those two, सुरोत्तमौ foremost of devatas, प्रशमम् peace, जग्मतु: obtained.
1::75::19::विष्णुपराक्रमै: with the prowess of Visnu, जृम्भितम् made inert, तत् that, शैवम् relating to Siva, धनु: bow, दृष्ट्वा haivng seen, तदा then, सर्षिगणा: hosts of sages, देवा: devatas, विष्णुम् Visnu, अधिकम् as superior, मेनिरे thought over. 
1::75::20::सङ्कृद्ध: enraged, महायशा: renowned, रुद्रस्तु Siva, विदेहेषु in the country of Videha, ससायकम् together with arrow, धनु: bow, राजर्षे: to the royal saint, देवरातस्य devarata's, हस्ते hands, ददौ gave.
1::75::21::राम O Rama, स: that, विष्णु: Visnu, परपुरञ्जयम् capable of conquering hostile cities, इदम् this, वैष्णवं धनु: bow of Visnu, भार्गवे belonging to Bhrigu race, ऋचीके named Richika,   उत्तमम् the best, न्यासम् in trust, प्रादात् gave.
1::75::22::महातेजा: exceedingly lustrous, ऋचीकस्तु Ruchika, पुत्रस्य to his son, अप्रतिकर्मण: of unrivalled valour, महात्मन: of the maganimous one, मम my, पितु: father, जमदग्ने: to Jamadagni, ददौ gave. 
1::75::23::तपोबलसमन्विते endowed with ascetic energy, मे my, पितरि when my father, न्यस्तशस्त्रे renounced the weapons, अर्जुन: Karta Virya Arjuna, प्राकृताम् in a vulgar manner, मृत्युम् death, बुद्धिम् mind,  आस्थितः resorting to, विदधे made.
1::75::24::राम O Rama, अप्रतिरूपम् incomparable, सुदारुणम् extremely ruthless, पितु: father's, वधम् slaying, श्रुत्वा having heard, रोषात् out of fury, जातं जातम् born again and again, क्षत्रम् kshatriya race, उत्सादयन् decimating, अखिलाम् entire, पृथिवीम् earth, प्राप्य having won, यज्ञस्य sacrifice's, अन्ते at the end of, महात्मने to the magnanimous, पुण्यकर्मणे doer of meritorious acts, काश्यपाय for Kasyapa, दत्त्वा having given, तपोबलसमन्वित: endowed with ascetic energy, महेन्द्रनिलय: living on Mahendra mountain as my abode.
1::75::25::महाबल O Highly energetic, राम O Rama, अद्य now, उत्तमवीर्येण with excellent prowess, त्वया by you, धनुष: भेदम् breaking of the bow, श्रुतवान् having listened, अहम् I, तत: for that reason, द्रुतम् speedily, आगत: have come. 
1::75::26::राम O Rama, क्षत्रधर्मम् duties of kshatriya, पुरस्कृत्य treating with respect, तत् that, इदम् this, पितृपैतामहम् being inherited from my father and forefathers, महत् eminent, उत्तमम् excellent, वैष्णवम् related to Visnu, धनु: bow, गृह्णीष्व take hold of.  
1::75::27::काकुत्स्थ O Descendant of Kakutstha, धनु: श्रेष्ठे in this excellent bow, परपुरञ्जयम् capable of conquering cities of enemies, शरम् arrow, योजयस्व unite it, शक्नोषि यदि if it is possible for you to do so, तत: then, ते to you, द्वन्दम् duel combat, दास्यामि shall offer. 
