1::61::1::O Tiger among men (Rama) thereafter great Viswamitra seeing the departing sages of the forest said:
1::61::2::
1::61::3:: O Highsouled sages, there is lake Pushkara in the vast western region. There in the forest fit for austerities we shall practise penance peacefully.
1::61::4::With this the most powerful sage Viswamitra reached Pushkara where living on fruits and roots, he carried out intense, unsurpassable,  austerities.
1::61::5::At this time Ambarisha, a wellknown king of Ayodhya, launched preparations for a  sacrifice.    
1::61::6::While he was performing the sacrifice Indra stole away the sacrificial animal. The animal could not be traced. Hence the priest said to the king:
1::61::7::O King the animal has been stolen away and because of your inability to enforce law, it could not be traced. O Lord of men the king who fails to protect (his dependents)  perishes by his own faults.
1::61::8::O Best of men you must pay a big price for this. Bring either the beast or a man immediately so that the sacrifice can be completed.  
1::61::9:: O Best of men (Rama) hearing the words of the high priest, the highly intellectual king searched for a human victim in exchange for thousands of cows. 
1::61::10::O Dear Rama, the delight of Raghu clan the king scoured countries, villages, cities, forests, sacred hermitages till he saw sage Richika in the Bhrigutunda mountain sitting with his sons and wie. 
1::61::11::The most brilliant king(Ambarisha) bowing to sage Richika, a brahmarshi who looked extremely resplendent with penance, propitiated him, enquired about the welfare of all and finally said:
1::61::12::O Fortunate descendent of the Bhrigu race if your son is sold as a sacrificial animal in exchange for a hundred thousand cows, my purpose will be answered.
1::61::13::I have roamed all countries but could not final the sacrificial animal. Should'nt you spare one of your sons for a price?
1::61::14::Thus addressed the exceedingly brilliant Richika said, O Best among men in no way shall I sell my first born. 
1::61::15::Having heard Richika, the miserable mother of great sons, addressed Ambarisha, the foremost of men, saying:
1::61::16::Venerable descendant of the Bhrugus (sage Richika) said that the eldest son cannot be sold. O King the youngest son, Sunaka, is my beloved son. You know, O King for that reason I will not give my yougest son.
1::61::17::O Best among men generally, the eldest sons are the favourites of their fathers, the youngest their mothers: For that reason, I shall keep my youngest son.
1::61::18::O Rama the sage and his wife having spoken thus, their middle son Sunassepha said on his own:
1::61::19::O King my father says his eldest son cannot be sold, mother says that her  youngest son cannot be spared. From this I think middle son is already sold away. Therefore, take me
1::61::20::O Delight of the Raghus (Rama) having purchased Sunassepha for a hundred thousands of cows the king refurned immensely pleased.
1::61::21::Most brilliant, illustrious rajarshi Ambarisha mounting Sunasshepha on his chariot instantly went away.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकषष्टितमस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the sixtyfirst sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
