1::20::1::On hearing Viswamitra, words the tiger among kings (Dasaratha) lost his senses for a moment  and  on regaining his consciousness spoke this way.
1::20::2::My lotuseyed son Rama is less than sixteen. I do not think  he has ability to fight with the rakshasas in a battle.
1::20::3::Here is the whole akshauhini (army) of which I am the lord and sustainer. Accompanied  by the  akshauhini I shall engage those rakshsasas in the battle.
1::20::4::These servants of mine are warriors, valiant, powerful and courageous, skilled in the use of weapons and fit to engage multitude of rakshasas in battle. It is not proper to take Rama with you.
1::20::5:: Wielding bow in hand I will protect the sacrifice. As long as my life sustains, I will engage the rakshasas in the battle.
1::20::6::.I shall go there, protect the sacrifice and see that it is conducted without obstacles. It is not proper to take Rama with you.
1::20::7::Rama is still a child, he is not learned in the science of warfare,he does not know the  strength and weakness of enemies. He has not acquired  as yet the strength of using  weapons and is not proficient in warfare. You know certainly those rakshasas are deceitful in battle. And hence he is not qualified to oppose them in the battle succesfully.
1::20::8::Separated from Rama, I do not like to live even for a moment. O tiger among ascetics, it is not proper to take Rama with you.
1::20::9:: O sage of great vows, O brahman if at all you intend to take Rama with you, take me  also along with my army.
1::20::10::O scion of of Kusika family, sixty thousand years have passed since I was born.  Rama was born to me after a great deal of suffering. It is not proper to take him with you.  
1::20::11::My love for Rama among all my four sons is supreme.It is not proper for you to take Rama, the eldest son whose prime qualification  is his virtue.
1::20::12::O best of sages, how powerful are those rakshsas? Whose  sons are they? Who are they and how huge is their body? Who are protecting them?
1::20::13::O brahman, how to rebuff those deceitful warriors either through Rama or through my army or through me?
1::20::14::O venerable one, how to fight those wickednatured ones in the battle and stay aginst them? For rakshasas are proud of their prowess. Having heard the words of Dasaratha, Viswamitra said:
1::20::15::
1::20::16:: Ravana, king of rakshasas, is the brother of Kubera and son of ascetic Visravana. He is said to possess great prowess.
1::20::17::Although endowed with great strength, Ravana, by himself, never created impediments to the sacrifice. But two rakshasas by name Maricha and Subahu are incited by him to cause obstacles.
1::20::18:: Informed in this manner by sage Viswamitra, king Dasaratha addressed the sage,  saying, I am not competent enough to stand before those evilminded rakshasas in the batlle. 
1::20::19::You are the knower of righteousness. Extend your favour to my little son and also to me for I am so who is unfortunate. You are verily my spiritual preceptor and god.
1::20::20::Gods, danavas, gandharvas, yakshas, birds and great serpents cannot withstand Ravana in battle. What are men to him? (They are no match to him).
1::20::21::That rakshasa pulls out warriors' prowess in the battle. O foremost of ascetics Either with forces or with my sons it is not possible for me to engage him or his forces in battle. 
1::20::22::O brahman although my son resembles the celestials he is not experienced in warfare. On no account shall I spare him.
1::20::23::Further the sons of Sunda and Upasunda by name Maricha and Subahu are causing obstacles to your sacrifice. They resemble the god of death, Yama. I shall never part with my son. 
1::20::24::Maricha and Subahu not only possess prowess but also are experienced in warfare. Together with my group of friends I can combat with one of the two.
1::20::25::Having heard the statements of the king the son of Kusika, Viswamitra who was like Indra among the ascetics was seized by great anger. As though fire in the form of  maharshi blazed like the sacrificial fire into which oblations of clarified butter have been poured. ।। iऋफफछफौ चफळउफp८फउफफऋफhफॊ खफफऔउफळE१ळऋफ फबn८E१फखऋफॊ अफफऔफE१फhbॊ६ भखफघफजजफMफऩityढऍ डrंmadraचऍ vmंkंya ikyऍ bakङऍ viनडassargaध৷৷Thus ends the twentieth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
