1::24::1::तत: thereafter, अरिन्दमौ two destroyers of enemies, विमले on a pure, प्रभाते daybreak, कृताह्निकम् by observing daily oblations, विश्वामित्रम् Viswamitra, पुरस्कृत्य ahead of them नद्या: river's, तीरम्  bank, उपागतौ arrived.
1::24::2::महात्मान: highminded, संश्रितव्रता: strict observers of vows, ते सर्वे all those, मुनय: ascetics, शुभाम् auspicious, नावम् boat, उपस्थाप्य kept ready, अथ there after, विश्वामित्रम् addressed Visvamitra, अब्रुवन् saying.
1::24::3::भवान् O Great rishi, राजपुत्रपुरस्कृत: with the princes ahead of you, नावम् boat, आरोहतु you may board it, अरिष्टम् devoid of evils, पन्थानम् path, गच्छ go, कालविपर्यय: loss of time,  माभूत् let not take place.
1::24::4::विश्वामित्र: Visvamitra, तथेति 'so be it', उक्त्वा having said, तान् ऋषीन् all those sages, अभिपूज्य having worshipped, ताभ्याम् by Rama and Lakshmana, सहित: accompanied by, सागरङ्गमाम् flowing towards the sea, सरितम् river Ganga, ततार crossed.
1::24::5::तत: then, राम: Rama, तोयस्य of  the water, मध्यम् midst, आगम्य having come,      अतिसंरम्भवर्धितम् greatly augmented by the speed, शब्दम् thunderous noise, कनीयसा सह with his younger brother, शुश्राव heard.
1::24::6::अथ thereafter, राम: Rama, सरिन्मध्ये in the midst of river, मुनिपुङ्गवम् best of the sages, प्रपच्छ enquired of, भिद्यमानस्य bursting, वारिण: waters, तुमुल: tumultuous, अयं ध्वनि: this sound, किम् what?
1::24::7::कौतूहलसमन्वितः filled with curiosity, राघवस्य वच: Rama's words, श्रुत्वा having heard, धर्मात्मा righteous minded one, तस्य of  that,  शब्दस्य relating to that sound, निश्चयम् nature, कथयामास narrated.
1::24::8::नरशार्दूल O Best among men, राम Rama, कैलासपर्वते on the mount Kailasa, ब्रह्मणा by Brahma, सर: lake, मनसा by his thought, निर्मितम् created, तेन for that reason, इदं सर: this lake, मानसम् is called Manasa.
1::24::9::तस्मात् सरस: from that Manasa lake, सुस्राव flowed, सा that river, अयोध्याम् Ayodhya, उपगूहते surrounds, सर प्रवृत्ता because it flows from that lake, सरयू: is known as Sarayu, ब्रह्मसरश्च्युता released from the lake of Brahma, पुण्या sacred.
1::24::10::जाह्नवीम् river Ganga, अभिवर्तते approaches, अयम् this, अतुल: great, शब्द: sound, तस्या: that river's, वारिसङ्क्षोभज: produced when the waters are clashed at their confluence, राम Rama, नियत: with a concentrated mind, प्रणामम् respectful salutations, कुरु do.
1::24::11::अतिधार्मिकौ both who were exceedingly righteous, तौ उभौ both of them, ताभ्याम् to the two rivers, प्रणामम् obeisance, कृत्वा having made, दक्षिणं तीरम् southern bank, आसाद्य having reached, लघुविक्रमौ with quick steps, जग्मतु: proceeded.
1::24::12::ऐक्ष्वाक: descendent of Ikshvaku, नृपवरात्मज: son of best of kings, स: he, घोरसङ्काशम् dreadful, अविप्रहतम् untrodden, वनम् forest, दृष्ट्वा having seen, मुनिपुङ्गवम् foremost of ascetics, पप्रच्छ asked.
1::24::13::झिल्लिकागणनादितम् having ceaseless sounds of crickets, भैरवै: by the frightful, श्वापदै: ferocious beasts, दारुणारुतै: creating fearful cries, शकुन्तै: by birds, पूर्णम् filled, इदम् this, वनम् forest, दुर्गम् inaccessible, अहो what a wonder.
1::24::14::वाश्यद्भि: shrieking, भैरवस्वनै: frightful sounds, नानाप्रकारै: by  various kinds of, शकुनै: birds, सिंहव्याघ्रवराहै: च lions, tigers, boars, वारणै: च by elephants, उपशोभितम् shining.
1::24::15::धवाश्वकर्णककुभै: with Dhava, Ashva, Karna, Kakubha,  बिल्वतिन्दुकपाटलै: with Bilva,Tinduka, Patala, बदरीभिश्च with Badaris, सङ्कीर्णम् thronged, एतत् दारुणम् this frightening, वनम्    forest, किं नु what indeed could this be? 
1::24::16::महातेजा: highly powerful, महामुनि: great sage, विश्वामित्र: Viswamitra, तम् addressing him, उवाच spoke, वत्स O Child, काकुत्स्थ Kakusthsa, एतत् दारुणं वनम् this dreadful forest, यस्य whose, श्रूयताम् let it be heard.
1::24::17::नरोत्तम O Best among men, पूर्वम् formerly, देवनिर्माणनिर्मितौ built by celestial architects, मलदाश्च Malada, करूशा: च and also Karusha, स्फीतौ large and prosperous, एतौ जनपदौ these two cities, आस्ताम् existed.
1::24::18::राम O Rama, पुरा in ancient times, वृत्रवधे at the time of destruction of Vritrasura, मलेन by impurity, क्षुधा चैव by hunger also, समभिप्लुतम् overpowered, सहस्राक्षम् Indra, ब्रह्महत्या sin arising out of slaying Brahmin, समाविशत्  attacked.
1::24::19::तम् इन्द्रम् Indra, देवा: devatas, स्नापयन् while bathing him, तपोधना: sages possessing asceticism as wealth, ऋषयश्च rishis, कलशै: with waterpitchers, स्नापयामासु: bathed him, अस्य मलम् his impurities, प्रमोचयन् liberated.
1::24::20::महेन्द्रस्य Mahendra's, शरीरजम् born from the body, मलम् taint and impurity, इह here, भूम्याम् at this place, दत्त्वा having left, कारूशमेव च hunger also, दत्त्वा having left, तत: there after, हर्षम् joy, प्रपेदिरे obtained.
1::24::21::इन्द्र: Indra, यदा when, निर्मल: removed of his impurities, निष्करूशश्च unaffected by hunger, शुचि: अभवत् became pure, प्रभु: all powerful lord, सुप्रीत: highly pleased, देशस्य for that region, अनुत्तमम् excellent, वरम् boon, ददौ gave.
1::24::22::मम my, अङ्गमलधारिणौ bearing impurities of my body, इमौ these, जनपदौ places, स्फीतौ becoming prosperous, मलदाश्च Malada, करूशाश्च and Karusha, लोके in this world, ख्यातिम् fame, गमिष्यत: will attain.
1::24::23::धीमता by the wise, शक्रेण by Indra, कृताम् performed, ताम् देशस्य of  that land, पूजाम् honour, दृट्वा having seen, देवा: gods, साधु साधु इति 'Well, Well', तं पाकशासनम् adddressing Indra, अब्रुवन् said.
1::24::24::अरिन्दम O Destroyer of enemies, मलदाश्च Malada, करूशाश्च and Karusha, स्फीतौ prosperous, एतौ these, जनपदौ townships, दीर्घकालम् for a long time, धनधान्यत: with the harvest of corn and wealth, मुदितौ rejoiced.
1::24::25::अथ thereafter, कस्यचित्कालस्य after a lapse of some time, कामरूपिणी capable of assuming forms at will, नागसहस्रस्य of a thousand elephants, बलम् strength of, धारयन्ती possessing, ताटका नाम यक्षी yakshi known as Tataka, धीमत: of the  intelligent, सुन्दस्य Sunda's, भार्या wife, शक्रपराक्रम: possessed of the power of Indra, मारीच: rakshasa known as Maricha, यस्या: whose, पुत्र: son, अभूत् became known, भद्रं ते May prosperity greet you.
1::24::26::वृत्तबाहु: one who has round arms, महावीर्य: a highly energetic, विपुलास्यतनु: having large face and huge body, महान् gigantic, भैरवाकार: having dreadful form, राक्षस: rakshasa, नित्यम् always, प्रजा: inhabitants, त्रासयते frightens.
1::24::27::राघव O Rama, दुष्टचारिणी a woman with wicked deeds, ताटका Tataka, मलदांश्च Malada, करूशांश्च Karusha, इमौ जनपदौ these two townships, नित्यम् always, विनाशयति destroys .
1::24::28::सा such, इयम् thisTataka, पन्थानम् the path, आवृत्य obstructing, अध्यर्धयोजने at one and half yojanas distance, वसति living, यत: for which reason, ताटकाया: Tataka, वनम् forest, अत एव for that reason, न गन्तव्यम् one should not traverse.
1::24::29::स्वबाहुबलम् strength of your own arms, आश्रित्य employing, दुष्टचारिणीम् this one of wicked deeds, इमाम् her, जहि slay,मन्नियोगात् by my order, इमं देशम् this country, पुन: again, निष्कण्टकम् devoid of that thorn, कुरु do it (make it habitable).
1::24::30::राम O Rama, घोरया by the dreadful, असह्यया by the intolerable, यक्षिण्या yakshini, उत्सादितम् destroyed, ईदृशम् such, इमम् देशम् this country, आगन्तुम् to approach, कश्चित् any one, न शक्नोति is not capable.
1::24::31::एतत् वनम् this forest, सर्वम् entirely, दारुणम् cruel, यक्ष्या by the yakshi,  यथा in such a  manner, उत्सादितम् ruined, अद्यापि even now, यथा in a manner, न निवर्तते does not go  back, एतत् सर्वम् all this, ते to you, आख्यातम् has been told.
