1::71::1::एवम् in this manner, ब्रुवाणम् speaking (Vasishta), जनक: Janaka, कृताञ्जलि: with folded palms, प्रत्युवाच replied, ते भद्रं safety to you, परिकीर्तितम् related, न: our, कुलम् genealogy,  श्रोतुम् to listen, अर्हसि behoves of you.
1::71::2::मुनिश्रेष्ठ O Best of ascetics, महामुने O Great sage, कुलजातेन by one born in a noble family, प्रदाने at the time of bestowing their daughter in marriage, निरवशेषत: completely, कुलम् geneology of dynasty, वक्तव्यं हि indeed to be told, तत् that, निबोध listen to the same. 
1::71::3::स्वेन by his own, कर्मणा acts, त्रिषु three, लोकेषु worlds, विश्रुत: known, परमधर्मात्मा supremely virtuous, सर्वसत्त्ववताम् those endowed with strength, वर: best, राजा निमि: अभूत् was king named Nimi. 
1::71::4::मिथिर्नाम named Mithi, तस्य his, पुत्र: son, येन निर्मिता by whom constructed, मिथिला Mithila  प्रथम: first, जनक: Janaka, नाम named, जनकाद् from Janaka, उदावसु: Udavasu was born.
1::71::5::उदावसो: तु for that Udavasu, धर्मात्मा righteous, नन्दिवर्धन: Nandivardha, जात: was born, नन्दिवर्धनपुत्र: तु the son of Nandivardhana, नामत: by name, सुकेतुर्नाम named Suketu. 
1::71::6::सुकेतो: अपि for that Suketu, धर्मात्मा righteous, महाबल: highly powerful, देवरात: Devarata, राजर्षे: rishi among kings, देवरातस्य for that Devarata, बृहद्रथ Brihadradha, इति स्मृत: known as.  
1::71::7:: बृहद्रथस्य for Brihadradha, शूर: heroic, प्रतापवान् valourous, महावीर: Mahavera, महावीरस्य Mahaveera's, धृतिमान् courageous, सत्यविक्रम: having truthful prowess, सुधृति: Sudhruti was born.
1::71::8::सुधृते: for Sudhruti, धर्मात्मा righteous, सुधार्मिक: committed to dharma, दृष्टकेतु: Drishtaketu, राजर्षे: of that royal rishi, दृष्टकेतो: for Drishtaketu, हर्यश्व: Haryasva, इति  विश्रुत: thus well known (son was born.)
1::71::9::हर्यश्वस्य Haryasva's, मरु: Maru, पुत्र: son, मरो: for Meru, प्रतिन्धक: Pratindhaka, पुत्र: son, धर्मात्मा righteous, राजा king, कीर्तिरथ: Kirtiratha, प्रतिन्धकस्य Pratindhaka's, सुत: son.
1::71::10::कीर्तिरथस्यापि Kirtiratha's, पुत्र: son, देवमीढ इति as Devamidha, स्मृत: has been known, देवमीढस्य Devamidha's son, विबुध: was Vibudha, विबुधस्य Vibhuda's son, महीध्रक: was Mahidhraka.
1::71::11:: महाबल: mighty, राजा कीर्तिरात: king Kirtirata, महीध्रकसुत: son of Mahidhraka, राजर्षेः of that  royal rishi, कीर्तिरातस्य Kirtirata's, महारोमा Maharoma, व्यजायत born.
1::71::12::महारोम्ण: तु for Maharoma, स्वर्णरोमा Swarnaroma, व्यजायत was born, राजर्षेः of the royal rishi, स्वर्णरोम्ण: तु for Swarnaroma, ह्रस्वरोमा Hrasvaroma, व्यजायत was born.
1::71::13::धर्मज्ञस्य knower of morality and ethics, तस्य of  that,  महात्मन: magnanimous, पुत्रद्वयम् two sons, जज्ञे were born, अहम् I am, ज्येष्ट: eldest, वीर: valiant,  कुशध्वज: Kusadhwaja, मम my, अनुज: younger, भ्राता brother. 
1::71::14::पिता father, स: नराधिप: king Hrasvaroma, ज्येष्ठं eldest, माम् me, राज्ये in the kingdom,  अभिषिच्य having crowned me, कुशध्वजं Kusadhwaja, भारम् responsibility of supporting,  मयि in me, समावेश्य placeing, वनम् forest, गत: went.
1::71::15::वृद्धे when the aged, पितरि father, स्वर्याते सति had attained heaven, भ्रातरम् brother, देवसङ्काशम् resembling devatas, कुशध्वजम् Kusadhwaja, स्नेहात् affectionately, पश्यन् looking after, धर्मेण with righteousness, धुरम weight of ruling the kingdom, आवहम् bore.
1::71::16::अथ thereafter, कस्यचित् कालस्य after sometime, वीर्यवान् powerful, सुधन्वा राजा king  Sundhava, मिथिलाम् Mithila, अवरोधक: with a view to beseige, साङ्काश्यात् from Sankasya, पुरात् city, अगमत् set out.
1::71::17::अनुत्तमम् excellent, शैवं धनु: bow of Siva, पद्माक्षी lotuseyed, कन्या maiden, सीता च Sita also, मह्यम् to me, दीयताम् be given, इति thus, प्रेषयामास sent a message.
1::71::18::ब्रह्मर्षे O Brahmarshi, अप्रदानात् by not offering, तस्य for him, मया सह with me, युद्धम् असीत् great conflict broke, रणे in the battle, अभिमुख: he in an encounter, स: that, सुधन्वा राजा king Sudhanva, मया by me, हत: killed. 
1::71::19::मुनिश्रेष्ठ O Best of ascetics, नराधिपम् king, तम् that, सुधन्वानम् Sudhanva, निहत्य having killed, भ्रातरम् brother, वीरम् heroic one, कुशध्वजम् Kusadhwaja, साङ्काश्ये in Sankasya, अभ्यषिञ्चम् I have crowned. 
1::71::20::महामुने O Great ascetic, एष: this one, मे my, कनीयान् youger, भ्राता brother, अहम् I, ज्येष्ठ: elder, मुनिपुङ्गव preeminent among ascetics, परमप्रीत: immensely pleased, ते those, वध्वौ two maidens, ददामि I am giving, सीतां रामाय Sita to Rama, ऊर्मिला लक्ष्मणाय Urmila to  Lakshmana, ते भद्रम् prosperity to you.
1::71::21::वीर्यशुल्काम् as reward for prowess, सुरसुतोपमाम् equal to the daughter of devatas, मम सुताम् my daughter, सीताम् Sita, द्वितीयाम् second daughter, ऊर्मिलां चैव Urmila also, त्रि: three times, ददामि bestowing, संशय: न no doubt. 
1::71::22::रघुनन्दन O King Dasaratha, परमप्रीत: immensely pleased, ते to you, वध्वौ brides, ददामि I am giving, राजन् O King, रामलक्ष्मणयो: to Rama and Lakshmana, गोदानम् distribution of cows, कारयस्व ह let it be performed, पितृकार्यं च ritual duty towards pitris, भद्रं ते prosperity to you, तत: thereafter, वैवाहिकम् कुरु let the marriage be performed.
1::71::23::महाबाहो O Strong armed one, प्रभो (विभो) O Lord, अद्य today, मखा हि star Makha is on the ascendent, राजन् O King, तृतीये दिवसे third day from today, फल्गुन्याम् known as Phalguni, तस्मिन् in that, उत्तरे in the star Uttara, वैवाहिकम् marriage, कुरु perform, राजन् O King, रामलक्ष्मणयो: for Rama and Lakshmana, सुखोदयम् for enjoying felicity, दानम् distribution of kine, etc, कार्यम् fit to be done.  
