1::62::1::O Foremost of men, O Delight of the Raghus (Rama) the illustrious king (Ambarisha) took Sunassepha with him. (On the way) at Pushkara he took some rest at noon.
1::62::2::While the king was resting at Pushkara, the famous Sunassepha, very much distressed, happened to see his maternal uncle Viswamitra in the company of other sages performing austerities.
1::62::3::With his face discoloured due to thirst and fatigue, he (Sunassepha) immediately fell into the sage's lap in a pitiable condition and said:
1::62::4::O Noble man O Preeminent among ascetics I have no mother nor father nor friends nor relatives. You should protect me according to dharma.
1::62::5::O Best among ascetics you are the protecor of everybody. You are promoter of others' welfare. May the king fulfil his purpose. May I live long and become immortal and attain heaven after performing great penance. May I enjoy heaven.
1::62::6::O Virtuous one with a kind heart protect this orphan. Like a father who protects his son, save me from this peril.  
1::62::7::Having heard Sunassepha, mighty ascetic Viswamitra consoled him in many ways and said to his sons:
1::62::8:: 
1::62::9::O sons of the sage this young boy has sought my protection. O Sons you may grant him his desire by merely offering your life.
1::62::10::Engaged in the observance of righteousness, all of you have done virtuous deeds. By becoming sacrificial animals for the king, you may satisfy Agni.
1::62::11::Then Sunassepha will be protected. The king's sacrifice will continue without hindrance. The gods will be gratified. My words also will come true.
1::62::12::O Best of men (Rama) in response to the words of the sage Madhuchanda and others said thus in a casual way with selfesteem.
1::62::13::O Lord protecting other's son by abandoning one' own is like partaking the flesh of a dog. We consider it a prohibited act.
1::62::14::On hearing the words of his sons Viswamitra, the eminent ascetic, eyes reddened with anger began to speak:
1::62::15:: (You have) not only trangressed my words but also (you are) censurable according to dharma. You have uttered such audacious and dreadrul words causing the hair to stand on end.
1::62::16::All of you shall live on earth for a thousand years, like the sons of Vasishta feeding on the flesh of dogs.
1::62::17::Viswamitra the best of ascetics, thus cursed his sons. Sunassepha, (now) was filled with distress. To relieve him of his pain he said:
1::62::18::Bedaubing your person with red sandal paste and adorned with red garlands, you will be bound to a Vaishnava, sacrificial post with sacred ropes. There invoke Agni with these hymns.
1::62::19::O Son of sage chant thse two sacred mantras in the sacrifice of Ambarisha.There after you will achieve success (long life).
1::62::20:: Sunassepha memorized the two verses with concentration of mind and hastened towards Amabarisha, a lion among kings. And said:
1::62::21::Endowed with great strength, you are a lion among kings. We shall go to the sacrificial assembly without delay. O Indra among monarchs, take up initiatory rites and  perform the sacrifice.
1::62::22::At the words of the sage's son, the king, eager with delight hastened towards the sacrificial ground.
1::62::23::With the consent of the officiating priests the king invested Sunasepha with the sacred symbols with Kusa grass, dressed him in red apparel and tied him to the sacrificial post as a sacrificial animal. 
1::62::24::Thus bound, the son of the sage praised the two devatas, Indra and Upendra with moving words.
1::62::25::O Descendant of Raghu (Rama) Indra, gratified with the secret hymn granted Sunassepha long life.
1::62::26::O Foremost of men O Rama the king also obtained from the sacrifics innumerable rewards by the grace of Indra several times greater than expected.
1::62::27::O Best among men the righteous and mighty ascetic Viswamitra also continued his austerities at Pushkara for a thousand years.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे द्विषष्टितमस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the sixtysecond sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
