1::27::1::The night over, illustrious Viswamitra called Rama with a sweet smile.
1::27::2:: O prince of great renown, I am extremely pleased. May you prosper Out of great love and affection for you I shall make over all the weapons.
1::27::3::With the help of these celestial weapons, you will vanquish even gods and demons, serpents together with gandharvas if they challenge you to a battle as enemies and take them as captives. I shall confer on you all such weapons. May you prosper
1::27::4::Mighty armed, heroic Rama I shall grant you the great celestial dandachakra. O best among men I shall grant you dharmachakra, kalachakra, visnuchakra, indraastra, vajraastra and the great, trident of Siva, brahmashirastra, ishika astra and highly superior brahmaastra. 
1::27::5::Born in the race of kakutstha and a tiger among men, O Rama I shall also grant two  shining maces known as modaki and shikhari.
1::27::6::Rama, I shall grant dharmapasa, kalapasa, varuna pasa, too unique weapons.
1::27::7::O descendant of Raghu I shall grant you two thunderbolts named shuska and ardra (dry and wet), painaka astra and narayanaastra.  
1::27::8::O blemishless Rama I shall grant you agneyaastra known as sikhara which is my favour weapon and vayavyaastra  known as prathana৷৷
1::27::9::O Rama bron in the Kakutstha race, I shall grant you two powers named hayasira (Horse head) and kraunchaastra.
1::27::10::I shall grant all these weapons, the dreadful kankala, pestle kapala and kankana used by asuras.
1::27::11::O mightyarmed prince, I shall grant mahaastra, vaidyadhara and and an excellent scimitar  known as nandana.
1::27::12::Rama, I shall grant two much favoured weapons namely gandharvaastras, manava  astra, which induce and suppress sleep and sauraastra as well.  
1::27::13::O renowned prince, best among men, receive these astras known as darpana, soshana, santhapana, vilapana, madana astra, the unassailable one favoured by kamadeva  and the paisacha astra known as mohana favoured by demons.
1::27::14::O tiger among men mighty prince, accept tamasa and saumanaastras, the unassailable, samavardha weapon, mausala, satyaastra, the supreme mayadhara astra, the terrible tejaprabhaastra capable of removing the energy of the opponent, a soft weapon called sisira, supremely formidable twashtus astra, Bhaga's terrible shiteshuastra (sharp arrowed one) and manava astra.
1::27::15::O Rama mightyarmed prince, receive these mighty and highly exalted  astras capable of assuming at once any form at will. 
1::27::16::Viswamitra, the greatest ascetic after the purification ritual stood with his face turned  east and happily, conferred on Rama collection of the unique mantras.
1::27::17:: The sage offered Rama the complete collection of those weapons which even the celestials find it difficult to acquire.
1::27::18:: While the sagacious ascetic Viswamitra was muttering the mystic terms of these venerable astras (addressing their respective deities), all these weapons (with their mystic power) attended on Rama.
1::27::19::The munificient presiding deities of the weapons with folded palms addressed these words to Rama saying, Here we are, at you disposal .
1::27::20::Rama received the astras he felt with his hands and commanded them saying, Live in my mind (serve me whenever I remember you).
1::27::21:: Thereafter, the cheerful Rama, bowed to the mighty ascetic Viswamitra and commenced his journey.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे सप्तविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyseventh sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
