1::30::1::अथ then, देशकालज्ञौ two knowledgeable persons with regard to time and place, अरिन्दमौ subduers of enemies, देशे in a particular place, काले च and time, वाक्यज्ञौ knowers of  speech, तौ both, राजपुत्रौ two princes, कौशिकम् addressing Visvamitra, वच: words, अब्रूताम् they spoke.
1::30::2::भगवन् O Adorable one, ब्रह्मन् O Brahmarshi, तौ निशाचरौ those two rakshasas, यस्मिन् काले in whatever time, संरक्षणीयौ to be protectd, श्रोतुम् to listen, इच्छाव: we are both desirous, तत् क्षणम् that moment, नातिवर्तेत shall not pass away. 
1::30::3::काकुत्स्थौ Rama and Lakshmana, एवम् in this manner, ब्रुवाणौ speaking thus, युयुत्सया with a desire to fight rakshasas, त्वरमाणौ with eagerness, नृपात्मजौ two princes, ते मुनय: those sages, सर्वे all, प्रीता: pleased, प्रशशंसु: extolled them.
1::30::4::राघवौ Rama and Lakshmana, युवाम् both of you, अद्यप्रभृति from today onwards, षड्रात्रम् six nights, रक्षतम् you may protect, एष: मुनि: this sage Visvamitra, दीक्षाम् initiation ceremony, गत: has entered, मौनित्वं च strict silence also, गमिष्यति will attain.
1::30::5::यशस्विनौ the two illustrious, तौ राजपुत्रौ the two princes, तत् वचनम् those words, श्रुत्वा having heard, षडहोरात्रम् six days and six nights, अनिद्रौ without sleep, तपोवनम् Tapovana,  अरक्षताम् protected. 
1::30::6::परमधन्विनौ two mighty archers, वीरौ two heroes, यत्तौ fully equipped, उपासाञ्चक्रतु: attended upon the sacrifice, अरिन्दमौ two destroyers of enemies, विश्वामित्रम् मुनिवरम् Visvamitra maharshi, ररक्षतु: protected.
1::30::7::अथ then, तस्मिन् काले when that period, गते had lapsed, षष्ठे when the sixth, अहनि day, समागते had approached, राम: Rama, सौमित्रिम् addressing Lakshmana, यत्त: be ready,  समाहित: भव be vigilant, अब्रनवीत् spoke. 
1::30::8::युयुत्सया with a keen desire to fight, त्वरितस्य eagerly awaiting, रामस्य Rama, एवम् in this manner, ब्रुवाणस्य while speaking, तत: thereafter, सोपाध्यायपुरोहिता surrounded by officiating priests and spiritual guides(reciters of the sacred hymns), वेदि: sacrificial  altar, प्रजज्वाल inflammed.
1::30::9::सदर्भचमसस्रुक्का along with kusa grass,the ladles and square vessels(used in the sacrifice out of which all the worshippers at a sacrifice drink the juice), ससमित्कुसुमोच्चया along with bundles of sticks used in the sacrificial fire and collection of flowers, विश्वामित्रेण सहिता along with Visvamitra, सर्त्विजा along with officiating priests, वेदि: altar, जज्वाल got inflammed.
1::30::10::असौ यज्ञ: this sacrifice, मन्त्रवत् in accordance with mantras, यथान्यायम् properly, सम्प्रवर्तते was being performed, आकाशे in the sky, भयानक: causing fear, महान् शब्द: great sound, प्रादुरासीत् emerged. 
1::30::11::प्रावृषि in the rainy season, निर्गत: originated, मेघ: clouds, यथा like, तथा similarly, गगनम् sky, आवार्य having covered, राक्षसौ two rakshasas, मायाम् illusion, विकुर्वाणौ displaying, अभ्यधावताम् came running.
1::30::12::भीमसङ्काशा fearful appearance, मारीचश्च Maricha, सुबाहश्च Subahu, तयो: their, ये अनुचरा: those of the followers, आगम्य having arrived, रुधिरौघम् streams of blood, अवासृजन् rained.
1::30::13::तेन रुधिरौघेण by that stream of blood, मण्डिता drenched, सा वेदि: that sacrificial altar, जज्वाल inflammed, तत: then, सहसा immediately, अभिद्रुत: rushed forward, राम: Rama, दिवि in the sky, तान् them, अपश्यत् beheld.
1::30::14::राजीवलोचन: the lotuseyed, राम: Rama, सहसा suddenly, आपतन्तौ advancing towards, तौ them, दृष्ट्वा having seen, लक्ष्मणम् addressing Lakshmana, अभिसम्प्रेक्ष्य fixing his sight at him, वचनम् these words, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::30::15::लक्ष्मण O Lakshmana, दुर्वृत्तान् wicked behavioured, पिशिताशनान् human flesh eaters, राक्षसान् rakshasas, अनिलेन by wind, घनान् यथा like clouds, मानवास्त्रसमाधूतान् scattered away by Manava astra, पश्य behold.
1::30::16::राघव: Rama, परमोदारम् greatly powerful, परमभास्वरम् highly effulgent, मानवम् Manava,  अस्त्रम् astra, परमक्रुद्ध: exceedingly furious, मारीचोरसि in the chest of Maricha, चिक्षेप hurled.
1::30::17::तेन by that, मानवेन Manava, परमास्त्रेण powerful astra, समाहित: smitten, स: he, Maricha, सम्पूर्णम् completely at a distance of, योजनशतम् hundred yojanas, सागरसम्प्लवे in the  surging high seas, क्षिप्त: was cast away.
1::30::18::शीतेषु बलताडितम् beaten by the power of that cool astra, विचेतनम् without senses, विघूर्णन्त  म् reeling, निरस्तम् thrown at a distance, मारीचम् Maricha, दृश्य having seen, राम: Rama, लक्ष्मणम् addressing Lakshmana, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::30::19::लक्ष्मण O Lakshmana, धर्मसंहितम् associated with righteousness, मानवं शीतेषुम् Manava astra employing cool arrow, पश्य behold, एनं मोहयित्वा making him unconscious, नयति is carrying away, प्राणै: with his life, न व्ययुज्यत he is not separated.
1::30::20::निर्घृणान् merciless, दुष्टचारिण: wicked behavioured, पापकर्मस्थान् doers of sinful acts, यज्ञघ्नान् destroyers of sacrifices, रुधिराशनान् blood drinking, इमान् राक्षसानपि these rakshasas also, वधिष्यामि I will slay them. 
1::30::21::तत: then, राम: Rama, दिव्यम् celestial, अद्भुतम् marvellous, आग्नेयास्त्रम् Agneya weapon, सङ्गृह्य having taken, सुबाहूरसि in the chest of Subahu, चिक्षेप hurled, स: he, विद्ध: having been struck down, भुवि on the ground, प्रापतत् fell down.
1::30::22::महायशा: illustrious, परमोदार: highly generous, राघव: Rama, मुनीनाम् for Ascetics, मुदम् delight, आवहन् causing, वायव्यम् Vayavya weapon, आदाय seizing, शेषान् remaining, निजघान killed.
1::30::23::रघुनन्दन: Rama, यज्ञघ्नान् obstructors of sacrifice, राक्षसान् rakshasas, सर्वान् all, हत्वा having killed, पुरा formerly, विजये when victorious, इन्द्र: यथा like Indra, तत्र there, ऋषिभि: by saints, पूजित: was worshipped. 
1::30::24::अथ thereafter, यज्ञे when the sacrifice, समाप्ते was  completed, विश्वामित्र: महामुनि: maharshi Visvamitra, निरीतिका:दिश: all the directions bereft of evils, दृष्टवा after beholding, काकुत्स्थम् addressing Rama, इदम् these words, अब्रवीत् uttered.
1::30::25::महाबाहो O Mighty armed one, कृतार्थ:अस्मि  I have achieved my spiritual desire, त्वया by you, गुरुवच: father's commands, कृतम् has been performed, महायश: OIllustrious one, राम Rama, इदम् this, सिद्धाश्रमम् Siddha ashrama, सत्यं कृतम्  has been proved to be true to its name.
