1::14::1::अथ after that, संवत्सरे when one year's time, पूर्णे (सति) was completed, तस्मिन् when that, तुरङ्गमे sacrificial horse, प्राप्ते (सति) had returned, सरय्वा: of river Sarayu, उत्तरे तीरे on the northern bank, राज्ञ: यज्ञश्च sacrifice by the king, अभ्यवर्तत commenced.
1::14::2::सुमहात्मन: of the exceedingly magnanimous, अस्य राज्ञ: this king's, अश्वमेधे महायज्ञे Aswamedha sacrifice, द्विजर्षभा: best among brahmins, ऋष्यशृङ्गम् Rsyasringa, पुरस्कृत्य led by, कर्म चक्रु: performed the rituals.
1::14::3::वेदपारगा: scholars who mastered vedas fully, याजका: chief priests, विधिवत् in consonance with tradition and scriptures, कर्म tasks, कुर्वन्ति carried out, यथाविधि in conformity with duties laid down in vedas, यथान्यायम् according to law, शास्त्रत: as laid down in scriptures, परिक्रामन्ति move about (officiated).
1::14::4::द्विजा: brahmins, प्रवर्ग्यम् Pravargya (a particular part of the sacrifice), शास्त्रत: according to scriptures, कृत्वा having done, तथैव and, उपसदम् Upasada (another part of the sacrifice), विधिवत् as per tradition, अधिकम् still other, सर्वं कर्म ceremonies, शास्त्रत: according to ordinance, चक्रु: performed.
1::14::5::तत: thereafter, मुनिपुङ्गवा: eminent ascetics, हृष्टा: rejoiced in their hearts, अभिपूज्य worshipping those celestial beings, प्रातस्सवनपूर्वाणि starting with Pratah savanadi (morning ablutions etc), कर्माणि rituals, यथाविधि as prescribed, चक्रु: performed.
1::14::6::ऐन्द्रश्च Indra's portion of Havis (oblations of clarified butter), विधिवत् according to tradition, दत्त: offered, अनघ: faultless or pure, राजा च Soma plant (acid juice of this plant mixed with clarified butter offered in libations to the gods), अभिषुत: was pressed for extracting juice, माध्यन्दिनम् ablutions to be performed during midday, सवनम् Savanam, यथाक्रमम् according to the order, प्रावर्तत took place.
1::14::7::तथा in the same way, ते ब्राह्मणपुङ्गवा: those eminent brahmins, शास्त्रत: in conformity with Shastras, दृष्ट्वा having seen, सुमहात्मन: of the exceedingly noble, अस्य राज्ञ: this king's, तृतीयसवनं चैव third pressing of the Soma in the evening, चक्रु: performed.
1::14::8::तत्र in that sacrifice, आहुतम् omissions in the offerings, नाभूत् did not take place, किञ्चन any thing, स्खलितम् defects or mistakes, नाभूत् did not take place, सर्वम् everything, ब्रह्मवत् with mantras (prayers), दृश्यते appeared, क्षेमयुक्तम् in a safe manner, चक्रिरे हि performed.
1::14::9::तेषु in those, अहस्सु days, श्रान्त: a tired man, क्षुधितो वापि or hungry one, न दृश्यते was not to be seen, तत्र there, अविद्वान् not learned, ब्राह्मण: brahmin, न दृश्यते not to be seen, तथा similarly, अशतानुचर: a man followed by less than hundred people, न दृश्यते was not seen.
1::14::10::नित्यम् continually, ब्राह्मणा: brahmanas, भुञ्जते are eating, नाथवन्तश्च those who have  masters, भुञ्जते are eating, तापसाश्चापि ascetics, भुञ्जते are eating, तथा and, श्रमणा: monks, भुञ्जते are eating.
1::14::11::वृद्धा: aged persons, व्याधिताश्चैव sick people, स्त्रिय: women, तथैव च and also, बाला: children, अनिशम् continually, भुञ्जमानानाम् although feasting, तृप्ति: full satisfaction, न उपलभ्यते is not acheeved.
1::14::12::अन्नम् food, दीयतां दीयताम् may be given, may be given, विविधानि various kinds of, वासांसि च clothes also, इति in this manner, तत्र in that sacrificial ground, सञ्चोदिता: persuaded by, अनेकश: profusely, तथा in the same manner, चक्रु: performed.
1::14::13::तत्र there, तदा then, विधिवत् in accordance with scriptures, सिद्धस्य kept ready, अन्नकूटा: heaps of food, बहव: many, पर्वतोपमा: looking like mountains, दिवसे दिवसे every day, दृश्यन्ते were to be seen.
1::14::14::महात्मन: Illustrious king's, तस्मिन् यज्ञे in that sacrifice, नानादेशात् from various countries, अनुप्राप्ता: arrived, पुरुषा: men, तथा and, स्त्रीगणा: women in groups, अन्नपानै: with food and drink, सुविहिता were well entertained.
1::14::15::द्विजर्षभा: the twiceborns, विधिवत् cooked in prescribed manner, साधु good (delicious), अन्नम् food, प्रशंसन्ति praised, राघव: son of Raghu, Dasaratha, अहो Ah, तृप्ता: स्म fully satisfied, ते to you, भद्रम् prosperity, इति such words, शुश्राव were heard.
1::14::16::स्वलङ्कृता: well dressed, पुरुषा: men, ब्राह्मणान् brahmins, पर्यवेषयन् served with, सुमृष्टमणिकुण्डला: wearing pendents bedecked with shining jewels, अन्ये च some others, तान् them, उपासते assisted.
1::14::17::तदा then, वाग्मिन: eloquent, धीरा: sagacious, विप्रा: brahmins, तदा then, कर्मान्तरे in between ceremonies, परस्परजिगीषया mutually desirous of victory, बहून् various, हेतुवादान् disputations, प्राहु: च engaged.
1::14::18::संस्तरे in the sacrifice, कुशला: skilful, द्विजा: brahmins, दिवसे दिवसे every day, तत्र there, प्रचोदिता: persuaded by sage Vasistha, सर्वकर्माणि all their duties, यथाशास्त्रम् as per tradition, चक्रु: performed.
1::14::19::अत्र in this sacrificial pavillion, अषडङ्गवित् not versed in six vedangas, नासीत् not there, अव्रत: unfaithful to vowed observances, न not there, अबहुश्रुत: not learned in many shastras, न not there, तस्य राज्ञ: that king's, सदस्या: assistants at a sacrifice, नावादकुशला: not skilful in disputations in shastras, न वै not there.
1::14::20::तस्मिन् in that sacrifice, यूपोच्छ्रये inerecting sacrificial posts, प्राप्ते (सति) when the time has come  nearer, बैल्वा: Bilva wood, षट् six, तथा and, बिल्वसहिता: along with Bilva posts, तावन्त: as many, खादिरा: Khadira, तथा and, पर्णिन: च having Parnas leaves, अपरे some more posts, एक: one, श्लेष्मातकमय: made of Sleshmataka, तथा and, देवदारुमय: made of trees of Devadaru, तत्र there, द्वौ two, बाहुव्यस्तपरिग्रहावेव at a distance of two outstretched hands, विहितौ were erected.
1::14::21::शास्त्रज्ञै: by the knowers of shastras, यज्ञकोविदै: who well versed in performance of sacrifice, कारिता: were made, एते सर्वे एव all these posts, तस्य यज्ञस्य of that sacrifice, शोभार्थम् for elegance, काञ्चनालङ्कृता: decorated with gold, अभवन् became.
1::14::22::एकविंशत्यरत्नय: measuring twenty one 'Aratni ' (distance from elbow to the tip of little finger), ते those, एकविंशतियूपा: twenty one posts, एकविंशद्भि: by twenty one, वासोभि: pieces of cloth, एकैकम् one for each post, समलङ्कृता: well decorated.
1::14::23::सर्वे all of them, शिल्पिभि: by the sculptors, सुकृता: were well carved, दृढा: strong, अष्टाश्रय: having eight sides, श्लक्ष्णरूपसमन्विता: had finely finished surfaces, सर्वे all those, विधिवत् as per tradition, विन्यस्ता: were erected.
1::14::24::वासोभि: with cloths, आच्छादिता: were covered, पुष्पै: with flowers, गन्धैश्च with sandalwood paste, भूषिता: decorated, ते those posts, दीप्तिमन्त: glowing, दिवि in the sky, सप्तर्षय: seven sages, यथा in a similar manner, विराजन्ते illuminated.
1::14::25::तत्र there, यथान्यायम् as per shastras, प्रमाणत: with standard measurement, इष्टका: bricks, कारिता were made, शुल्बकर्मणि in the science of construction using a measuring rope, कुशलै: accomplished, ब्राह्मणै: brahmins, अग्नि: sacrificial fire place, चित: gathered and laid bricks were prepared as per standard measurment mentioned in shastras.
1::14::26::कुशलै: by the skilled, द्विजै: brahmins, रुक्मपक्ष: golden winged, त्रिगुण: thrice, अष्टादशात्मक: eighteen in number, गरुड: like eagle, राजसिंहस्य of Dasaratha who was lion among kings, सचित्य: sacrificial altar, सञ्चित: was erected.
1::14::27::तत्र there, यथाशास्त्रम् as per tradition, प्रचोदिता: prompted, पशव: animals, उरगा: serpants, पक्षिणश्चैव birds also, तत्तत् that respective, दैवतम् deity,  उद्दिश्य intended for, नियुक्ता: were fastened.
1::14::28::तदा then, शामित्रे तु in the act of killing animals, तत्र there, हय: horse, तथा and, ये other, जलचरा: aquatic animals, एतत्सर्वम् all these, ऋत्विग्भि: by chief priests, शास्त्रत: in accordance with tradition, नियुक्तम् tied up.
1::14::29::तदा then, तत्र there, पशूनाम् of animals, त्रिशतम् three hundred, तस्य राज्ञ: that king's, अश्वरत्नोत्तमम् the excellent of the horses from the stables, यूपेषु to the sacrificial posts, नियतम् was bound.
1::14::30::तत्र there, कौशल्या Kausalya, तम् that, हयम् horse, समन्तत: from all sides, परिचर्य having worshipped worship, परमया with immense, मुदा glee, त्रिभि: by three strokes of, कृपाणै: scimitar, एनम् this, विशशास severed.
1::14::31::तदा then, कौशल्या Kausalya, सुस्थितेन चेतसा with a stable mind, धर्मकाम्यया with devotion to duty, पतत्रिणा सार्थम् near that horse, एकाम् one, रजनीम् night, अवसत् spent.    
1::14::32::होता Hota, अध्वर्यु: Adhvaryu, तथा and, उद्गाता Udgata, महिष्या with Mahishi (principal queen at the time of coronation), परिवृत्त्या च (overlooked wife) Parivritti, वावाताम् (a courtesan) Vavaata, अपराम् (attender on the king) other woman (known as Palakali), हस्तेन with hand, समयोजयन् touched.
1::14::33::नियतेन्द्रिय: a man of restrained senses, परमसम्पन्न: very rich in the knowledge of scriptures, ऋत्विक् official priest, तस्य that, पतत्रिण: horse's, वपाम् marrow, उद्धृत्य having removed, शास्त्रत: according to tradition, श्रपयामास cooked.
1::14::34::नराधिप: king Dasaratha, यथाकालम् in an appropriate time, यथान्यायम् in agreement with the scriptures, आत्मन: his own, पापम् sins, निर्णुदन् while getting rid of, वपाया: of the  marrow, धूमगन्धम् good odour of the smoke, जिघ्रति स्म inhaled.
1::14::35::हयस्य horse's, यानि अङ्गानि those limbs, तानि सर्वाणि all of them, समन्त्रा: with prayers, षोडश ऋत्विज: sixteen officiating priests, ब्राह्मणा: brahmins, विधिवत् as per the customs,  अग्नौ in the fire, प्रास्यन्ति offered.
1::14::36::अन्येषाम् of other, यज्ञानाम् sacrifices, हवि: oblations, प्लक्षशाखासु in the brahches of Plaksha tree, क्रियते was offered, अश्वमेधस्य यज्ञस्य of Aswamedha sacrifice, भाग: one portion of Havis, वैतस: cane creeper, इष्यते chosen.
1::14::37::ब्राह्मणै: by brahmins, कल्पसूत्रेण according to Kalpa sutra, अश्वमेध: Aswamedha, त्र्यह: having three days duration, सङ्ख्यात: is reckoned, तस्य of that, प्रथमम् first, अह: day, चतुष्टोम: chatushtoma, परिकल्पितम् planned.
1::14::38::द्वितीयम् on the second day, उक्थ्यम् Ukthya, तथा and, उत्तरम् on the following day, अतिरात्रम् Atiraatra, सङ्ख्यातम् is declared, तत्र In that sacrifice, शास्त्रदर्शनात् according to scriptural knowledge, विहिता: imposed, बहव: many, कारिता: were performed.
1::14::39::ज्योतिष्टोमायुषी Jyotishtoma and Ayuryaga, एवम् and, अतिरात्रौ in Atiratri, विनिर्मितौ were advised, अभिजित् Abhijit, विश्वजित् Viswajit, एवम् and, अप्तोर्याम: Aptoryama, महाक्रतु: great sacrifice, were performed.
1::14::40::स्वकुलवर्धन: promoter of his dynasty, राजा Dasaratha, होत्रे to Hotar, प्राचीं दिशम् easten region, ददौ gave, अध्वर्यवे to Adhvaryu, प्रतीचीम् western side, ब्रह्मणे to Brahma, दक्षिणां दिशम् southern region, तथा and, उद्गात्रे to Udgata, उदीचीम् northern region, पुरा long ago, स्वयम्भूविहिते prescribed by Brahma, हयमेधे महायज्ञे in the mighty horsesacrifice, एषा this, दक्षिणा offering, विनिर्मिता is fixed.
1::14::41::पुरुषर्षभ: best among men, राजा king Dasaratha, कुलवर्धन: upholder of his dynasty, क्रतुम् समाप्य having concluded the sacrifice, तदा then, न्यायत: according to law, तां धराम् that  earth, ऋत्विग्भ्य: for priests, ददौ offered.
1::14::42::सर्वे all, ऋत्विजस्तु priests on their part, गतकल्मषम् purged of all sins, राजानम् the king, अब्रुवन् said, भवान् you, एक:एव you alone, कृत्स्नाम् entire, महीम् earth, रक्षितुमर्हति are worthy of protection.
1::14::43::भूमिप O Ruler of the earth, भूम्या with earth, अस्माकम् for us, न कार्यम् have nothing to do, पालने in ruling, न हि शक्ता: we are not capable, वयम् we, नित्यम् constantly, स्वाध्यायकरणे in  studying of vedas, रता: हि are dedicated indeed, भवान् you, इह in the matter of this offering, किञ्चित् whatever, निष्क्रयम् in lieu value, प्रयच्छतु may confer.
1::14::44::नरश्रेष्ठ O best of men, मणिरत्नम् a precious gem, सुवर्णं वा or gold, गाव: cows, यद्वा or else,  समुद्यतम् is ready, तत् that, प्रयच्छ give, धरण्या with earth, प्रयोजनं न no use.
1::14::45::नरपति: lord of men, नृप: king Dasaratha, वेदपारगै: by scholars who were well learned in vedas, ब्राह्मणै: by brahmins, एवम् in this manner, उक्त: having spoken, तेभ्य: for them, गवां दश शतसहस्राणि ten hundred thousands, सुवर्णस्य gold, शतकोटी: hundred crores, रजतस्य of  silver, चतुर्गुणम् four times as much, ददौ bestowed.
1::14::46::तत: thereafter, ऋत्विज: priests, सर्वे all, सहिता: together, वसु wealth, ऋश्यशृङ्गाय मुनये for sage Rsyasringa, धीमते to the man endowed with prudence, वसिष्ठाय to vasistha,  प्रददु: gave.
1::14::47::तत: then, सुप्रीतमनस: highly pleased, ते द्विजोत्तमा: those brahmins, सर्वे all, न्यायत: with equity, प्रविभागम् share, कृत्वा having made, भृशम् exceedingly, मुदिता: delighted, प्रत्यूचु:  replied.
1::14::48::तत: thereafter, तदा then, सुसमाहित: with earnestness, प्रसर्पकैभ्य: to those who have come to see the sacrifice, ब्राह्मणेभ्य: to brahmins, कोटिसंख्यम् one crore of, जाम्बूनदम् gold, ददौ bestowed.
1::14::49::अथ there after, राघवनन्दन: Dasaratha, याचमानाय soliciting, कस्मैचित् one such, दरिद्राय poor, द्विजाय brahmin, उत्तमम् excellent, हस्ताभरणम् bracelet, ददौ gave.
1::14::50::तत: then, द्विजवत्सल: affectionate towards brahmins, नृपति: king, द्विजेषु when brahmins, प्रीतेषु (सत्सु) were highly pleased, हर्षपर्याकुलेक्षण: with his eyes filled with delight, तेषाम् for them, प्रणामम् अकरोत् bowed low before them.
1::14::51::अथ there after, उदारस्य of the generous, नृवीरस्य of him who was mighty among men, धरण्याम् on the earth, प्रणतस्य prostrated, तस्य for him, ब्राह्मणै: by brahmins, विधिवत् according to procedure, आशिष: blessings, समुदीरिता: were uttered.
1::14::52::तत: there after, राजा king Dasaratha, पापापहम् capable of removing sins, स्वर्नयनम् leading to heaven, पार्थिवर्षभै: for monarchs, दुष्करम् incapable of being done, अनुत्तमम् greatest, यज्ञम् sacrifice, प्राप्य having performed, प्रीतमना: cheerful heart.
1::14::53::तत: there after, दशरथ: राजा king Dasaratha, तदा then, ऋष्यशृङ्गम् addressing Rsyasringa, अब्रवीत् said, सुव्रत O Adherent of vows, कुलस्य of the race, वर्धनम् continuity, त्वम् you,कर्तुम् to do, अर्हसि deserve.
1::14::54::द्विजसत्तम: best of brahmins, तथेति be it so, राजानम् addressing king Dasaratha, उवाच said,  राजन् O king, ते to you, कुलोद्वहा: perpetuating race, चत्वार: four, सुता: sons, भविष्यन्ति will be born.
