1::60::1::The most brilliant Viswamitra, having destroyed the sons of Vasishta including Mahodaya by his ascetic power, said this in the midst of saints:
1::60::2:: This religious and generous king born in the Ikshvaku race, wellknown as Trisanku sought my refuge to gain heaven with his physical body,   
1::60::3::Join me in the performance of this sacrifice in a manner by which he (Trisanku) attains  heaven with his physical body.
1::60::4::Agreeing to these words of Viswamitra all the rishis, knowers of spiritual order and endowed with righteousness assembled there said:
1::60::5:: Born in the line of Kusika, this sage is extremely cholerictempered. Whatever he says must be properly carried out. There should be no resitation on this score. The venerable sage is like fire. He will curse us if angered.
1::60::6::Hence let the sacrifice be performed in such a manner that the descendant of the Ikshvakus would attain heaven with his physical body through the spiritual power of Viswamitra. All of you commence the sacrifice.
1::60::7::The maharshis having resolved performed their respective activities relating to the sacrifice. The brilliant Viswamitra acted as the chief officiating priest.
1::60::8::The officiating priests proficient in chanting mantras performed in order of their respective ranks all the rites in accordance with the Yojanakalpa adhering to codes and traditions.
1::60::9::Long after, the mighty ascetic Viswamitra  invoked all the gods to partake their share of offerings.
1::60::10::When, the gods invited by him did not come to receive their share of offerings, the great ascetic Viswamitra seized with anger lifted the sacrificial ladle and said to Trisanku:
1::60::11::O King behold the prowess of my selfearned asceticism. With my spiritual might, I shall send you to heaven with your physical body O King go to heaven with physical body which is not possible for anybody to accomplish.
1::60::12::By the power of what little fruit of austerities I have earned, I shall send to heaven with your body.
1::60::13:: O Descendant of Kakustha (Rama) when the sage had said these words, the king with his physical body ascended to heaven in the presence of the sages. 
1::60::14::On ascending to heaven Trisanku saw Indra (destroyer of Paka) along with hosts of  gods. Indra said to him:
1::60::15::O Trisanku you are not fit to inhabit heaven. Go back, you fool Doomed by the curse of your spiritual preceptor, fall on earth, head down.
1::60::16::Thus spoken to by Indra, Trisanku crying, O Viswamitra, Protect me, Protect me started falling down.
1::60::17:: Having heard the wailing Trisanku, the enraged Viswamitra shouted, Stay, Stay.
1::60::18::Standing in the midst of the ascetics, that  mighty sage who conjured up a constellation of seven new rishis (stars) looked like another creator Brahma. Overcome by anger the illustrious sage created a new group of stars in the southern direction.   
1::60::19::Having created a constellation of stars, Viswamitra out of anger said, I will create  another Indra or this world will be without Indra and commenced to create even gods.
1::60::20::Struck with wonder and fear, hosts of rishis, suras and asuras humbly addressed Viswamitra.
1::60::21::O Glorious maharshi, this king cursed by his spiritual preceptor is not worthy of going to heaven with his physical body. 	
1::60::22::The son of Kushika (Viswamitra), the preeminent ascetic heard the gods and said these praiseworthy words:
1::60::23::I wish you well Having promised king Trisanku ascent to heaven with his  physical form, I do not wish to go back on my word.
1::60::24:: Let this heaven be an eternal abode for Trisanku in his physical form All these stars created by me shall endure as long as the worlds survive. O gods it behoves of you to accord consent to this. 
1::60::25:: Thus addressed, all the gods, replied to the preeminent ascetic, O Best among sages, be blessed let thy will be donel. Those many celebrated stars shall stay on all sides outside the path of Vaisvanara (zodiac) in the firmament. Amidst those stars, Trisanku, shining brilliantly like an immortal, shall stay on, head down. 
1::60::26::These stars will follow this illustrious one (Trisanku), the best of kings who gained his object, as if he had attained heaven.
1::60::27::In this manner extolled by all devatas and rishis, mighty and righteous Viswamitra said, 'well let it be so'.
1::60::28::O Best among men (Rama) then at the conclusion of the sacrifice the great gods and saints went the way they had come.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे षष्टितमस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the sixtieth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
