1::19::1::राजसिंहस्य of the lion among kings, Dasaratha, तत् अद्भुतविस्तरम् that astonishing detail, वाक्यम् words, श्रुत्वा having heard, महातेजा: highly vigorous, विश्वामित्र: Viswamitra, हृष्टरोमा: having hair on the body bristling with joy, अभ्यभाषत said.
1::19::2::राजशार्दूल O Tiger among kings, भुवि in this earth, महाकुलप्रसूतस्य having born in an illustrious line, वसिष्ठव्यपदेशिन: having been initiated by Vasishta, तव for you, एतत् this, सदृशम् befitting, न अन्यथा not in any other way.
1::19::3::राजशार्दूल O Great king, मे my, हृद्गतम् conceived in my mind, यत् whichever, वाक्यम् word, तस्य कार्यस्य for such purpose, निश्चयम् decision, कुरुष्व take, सत्यप्रतिश्रव: भव become truthful to your promise.
1::19::4::पुरुषर्षभ O Best among men, अहम् I, सिध्यर्थम् for succesful accomplishment(of a sacrifice), नियमम् religious discipline, आतिष्ठे I shall abide, तु but, कामरूपिणौ those assuming forms at free will, द्वौ two, राक्षसौ rakshasas, तस्य for that sacrifice, विघ्नकरौ are creating impediments.
1::19::5::बहुश: In many ways, चीर्णे performed, मे my, व्रते sacrifice, समाप्त्याम् nearing completion, वीर्यवन्तौ powerful, सुशिक्षितौ two welltrained beings, मारीचश्च Maricha, सुबाहुश्च and also Subahu, समांसरुधिरौघेण by the stream of blood along with flesh, तां वेदिम् that altar, अभ्यवर्षताम् rained.
1::19::6::तस्मिन् नियमनिश्चये when the solemn vow for observance of that religious rite, अवधूते was pushed aside, तथा भूते when it happened so, कृतश्रम: an exerted man, निरुत्साहः discouraged, तस्मात् देशात् from that country, अपाक्रमे I left.
1::19::7::पार्थिव O King, क्रोधम् wrath, उत्स्रष्टुम् to vent out, मे बुद्धि: न भवति my mind does not permit, सा चर्या that sacrificial perfomnce of sacrifice, तथा भूता हि  is such that, तत्र at that time, शाप: curse, न मुच्यते will not be released. 
1::19::8::राजशार्दूल O Great king, सत्यपराक्रमम् truthful to his prowess, काकपक्षधरम् sidelocks of  hair, शूरम् valiant, स्वपुत्रम् your son, ज्येष्ठम् eldest one, रामम् Rama, मे to me, दातुम् to entrust, अर्हसि it is befitting of you. 
1::19::9::मया by me, गुप्त: protected, एष: he, दिव्येन by the divine, स्वेन his own, तेजसा by power, ये विकर्तार: those causing impediments, राक्षसा: rakshasas, तेषामपि even to them, विनाशने in destroying, शक्त: हि is capable.
1::19::10::अस्मै for him, बहुरूपम्  several forms of, श्रेयश्च blessings for his wellbeing, प्रदास्यामि I will confer, संशय:न no doubt, येन by which, त्रयाणाम् of the  three, लोकानामपि worlds also, ख्यातिम् fame, गमिष्यति he will attain.
1::19::11::तौ Maricha and Subahu, रामम् Rama, आसाद्य having reached, कथञ्चन in any way,  स्थातुम् stand, न शक्तौ not be able, राघवात्  except Rama, अन्य: any other, पुमान् man, तौ both of them, हन्तुम् to slay, न उत्सहते will not be  capable.
1::19::12::वीर्योत्सिक्तौ proud of their strength, तौ पापौ those two wicked demons, कालपाशवशम् noosed by  of Yama, the god of death, गतौ (have) become, राजशार्दूल O Great king, महात्मन: of the magnanimous, रामस्य for Rama, न पर्याप्तौ no match.
1::19::13::पार्थिव O King, पुत्रकृतम् developed towards your son, स्नेहम् paternal affection, कर्तुम् to do,  न अर्हसि it is not proper for you, तौ राक्षसौ both those rakshasas, हतौ (will) perish, विद्धि know it well, अहम् I, ते to you, प्रतिजानामि I assure you.
1::19::14::महात्मानम् nobleminded, सत्यपराक्रमम् truthful to his prowess, रामम् Rama, अहम् I, वेद्मि I know, महातेजा: highly lustrous, वसिष्ठोऽपि Vasishta also, ये तपसि स्थिता: those who are steadfast in asceticism, इमे sages.
1::19::15::राजेन्द्र O Great king, ते to you, धर्मलाभम् benefits of righteousness, इच्छसि यदि if you are  seeking, परमम् great, यशश्च fame, भुवि in this world, स्थितम् everlasting, रामम् Rama, मे to me, दातुम् to give me, अर्हसि it is proper and fit. 
1::19::16::काकुत्स्थ O Kakustha, तव your, मन्त्रिण: counsellors, वसिष्ठप्रमुखा: Vasistha, being the foremost among them, सर्वे all, अनुज्ञाम् consent, ददते यदि if they give, तत: then, रामम् Rama, विसर्जय you may relieve him.
1::19::17::अभिप्रेतम् dear to you, आत्मजम् son, राजीवलोचनम् lotuseyed, रामम् Rama, असंसक्तम् impartial and detached, यज्ञस्य of the sacrifice, दशरात्रम् ten days, दातुम् अर्हसि you deserve to  give.
1::19::18::राघव O Descendent of Raghu, Dasaratha, मम my, यज्ञस्य this  sacrifice, अयं काल: the time, यथा in whichever manner, नात्येति does not get delayed, तथा in that manner, कुरुष्व act, शोके in grief, मन: mind, मा कृथा: do not indulge, भद्रं prosperity, ते to you.
1::19::19::धर्मात्मा virtuous, महातेजा: resplendent, महामुनि: great sage, विश्वामित्र: Visvamitra, इत्येवम् in this manner, धर्मार्थसहितम् meaing containing religious merit, वच: words, उक्त्वा having spoken, विरराम became silent.
1::19::20::स:राजेन्द्र: that Indra of kings, king Dasaratha, शुभम् auspicious, तत् विश्वामित्रवच: those words of Visvamitra, निशम्य having listened, तीव्रम् intense, शोकम् grief, अभ्यगमत् obtained, भयान्वित: over powered by fear, व्यषीदत became despondent.
1::19::21::इति in this manner, हृदयमनोविदारणम्  breaking the heart and mind, तत् मुनिवचनम् those words of sage Visvamitra, शश्रुवान् listened, महान् revered, नरपति: king, तदा then, अतीव व्यथितमना: अभवत् was exstreemly mentally agitated, आसनात् from his throne, चचाल च was shaken.
