1::77::1::रामे when Rama, गते had departed, प्रशान्तात्मा with serene mind, दाशरथि: son of Dasaratha, राम: Rama, ससायकम् together with arrow, धनु: bow, अप्रमेयाय immeasurable, strength, वरुणाय to Varuna, हस्ते in his hand, ददौ gave.  
1::77::2::तत: thereafter, रघुनन्दन: descendant of Raghu, राम: Rama, वसिष्ठप्रमुखान् Vasishta and other, ऋषीन् rishis, अभिवाद्य having paid obeisance, विह्वलम् agitated, पितरम् father, दृष्ट्वा  having seen, प्रोवाच said.
1::77::3::जामदग्न्य: son of Jamadagni, राम: Rama, गत: had gone, नाथेन by being a lord, त्वया by you, पालिता ruled, चतुरङ्गिणी सेना four divisions of army, अयोध्याभिमुखी towards Ayodhya, प्रयातु let it advance.
1::77::4::महाराज O King, त्वच्छासने in your command, स्थिताम् remaining, सेनाम् army, सन्दिशस्व direct it, चातकालि: rows of Chataka birds, जलं यथा like water, सेना army, शासनं command, काङ्क्षते is seeking.  
1::77::5::राजा king, दशरथ: Dasaratha, रामस्य Rama's, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा having heard, सुतम् son, राघवम् Rama, बाहुभ्याम् with hands, सम्परिष्वज्य having embraced, मूर्ध्नि on the forehead, आघ्राय च having smelt (kissed in delight), राम: Parasurama, गत: इति had departed, श्रुत्वा having listened, हृष्ट: filled with joy, प्रमुदित: exceedingly delighted, नृप: king, पुत्रम् son, तदा then, आत्मानमेव himself as well, पुन: again, जातम् having been born, मेने considered. 
1::77::6::राजा king Dasaratha, ताम् that, सेनाम् army, चोदयामास directed, पताकाध्वजिनीम् adorned with flags and banners, रम्याम् beautiful, तूर्योद्घुष्टनिनादिताम् resounding with the sounds of trumpets, सिक्तराजपथाम् royal highways sprinkled with water, प्रकीर्णकुसुमोत्करामम् with flowers strewn, राजप्रवेशसुमुखै: delighted with the king's entry, मङ्गलवादिभि: making auspicious sounds with instruments, पौरै: by citizens, सम्पूर्णाम् filled with, जनौघै: by  groups of people, समलङ्कृताम् well decorated, पुरीम् city, आशु speedily, जगाम went.
1::77::7::पौरै: by the citizens, पुरवासिभि: living in the city,  द्विजै: च by brahmins also, दूरम् from a long distance, प्रत्युद्गत: welcomed by walking towards him, श्रीमद्भि: by the graceful, पुत्रै: sons, अनुगत: followed by, श्रीमान् elegant, महायशा: possessing high fame, राजा king, पुन: again, हिमवत्सदृशम् resembling Himavat, गृहम् residence, प्रविवेश entered. 
1::77::8::राजा king, गृहे in the residence, कामै: with objects of enjoyment, सुपूजितः well honoured, सजन: with his relations and family members, ननन्द rejoiced, कौसल्या च Kausalya, सुमित्रा च Sumitra, सुमध्यमा slender waisted, कैकेयी च Kaikeyi, या: ह्यन्या: others, राजयोषितः women of royal family, वधूप्रतिग्रहे in receiving the new brides, युक्ता: engaged.
1::77::9::तत: thereafter, नृपपत्नय: king's wives, महाभागाम् highly fortunate, सीताम् Sita, यशस्विनीम्  having fame, ऊर्मिलां च Urmila, उभे both, कुशध्वजसुते daughters of Kusadhwaja, जगृहु: received.
1::77::10::ता: सर्वा: all of them, मङ्गलालम्भनैश्चापि holding auspicious substances, शोभिता: shining, क्षौमवासस: attired in silken apparels, आशु immediately, देवतायतनानि temples, प्रत्यपूजयन् worshipped.
1::77::11::तदा then, सर्वा: all of them, राजसुता: princesses, अभिवाद्यान् worthy of homage, अभिवाद्य having paid obeisance, अथ thereafter, कुबेरभवनोपमम् resembling the palace of Kubera, स्वं स्वम् their own, गृहम् residence, आसाद्य having reached, गोभि: with cows, धनैश्च with riches, धान्यैश्च with corn, द्विजोत्तमान् brahmins, तर्पयित्वा (अर्चयित्वा) having worshipped, रह: in private, भर्तृभि: with husbands, सहिता: united with, मुदिता: well pleased, रेमिरे enjoyed.
1::77::12::महात्मान: magnanimous, वीर्येण in prowess, भुवि on this earth, अप्रतिमा: incomparable, कृतदारा: having got married, कृतास्त्राश्च competent in the use of weapons, सधना: endowed with wealth, ससुहृज्जना: together with friends, नरर्षभा: excellent among men, कुमारा: sons, पितरम् father, शुश्रूषमाणा: serving, वर्तयन्ति were moving on their way.
1::77::13::अथ thereafter, कस्यचित्कालस्य after some time, रघुनन्दनः delight of Raghu race, राजा दशरथ: king Dasaratha, कैकयीपुत्रम् son of Kaikeyi, सुतम् son, भरतम् addressing Bharata, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::77::14::पुत्रक O Child, त्वाम् you, नेतुम् to take, आगत: has come, केकयराजस्य Kekaya king's, पुत्र: son, वीर: heroic one, तव your, मातुल: metarnal uncle, अयम् this, युधाजित् Yudhajit, वसति is here. 
1::77::15::धर्मज्ञ O Knower of duties, अहम् I, तेन by him, मिधिलायाम् in Mithila, ऋषिमध्ये in the midst of sages, तथा in that way, प्रार्थित: have been requested, त्वम् you, तस्य for him, प्रीतिम् delight, कर्तुम् to cause, अर्हसि behoves of you.
1::77::16::कैकयीसुत: son of Kaikeyi, भरत: Bharata, दशरथस्य Dasaratha's, एतत् this, श्रुत्वा having heard, गुरुम् father, रामम् Rama, अभिवाद्य having paid obeisance, लक्ष्मणम् Lakshmana, परिष्वज्य embracing, तदा then, शत्रुघ्नसहित: together with Satrughna, गमनाय to depart, अभिचक्राम started. 
1::77::17::शूर: valiant, नरश्रेष्ठ: excellent among men, Bharata, पितरम् father, अक्लिष्टकारिणम् doer of acts without fatigue, रामम् Rama, मातृश्चापि mothers also, आपृच्छ्य having asked (their leave), शत्रुघ्नसहित: together with Satrughna, ययौ departed.
1::77::18::तदा then, भरते when Bharata, गते had departed, राम: Rama, महाबल: mighty one,  लक्ष्मणश्च Lakshmana also, देवसंङ्काशम् resembling god, पितरम् father, पूजयामासतु: both of them served. 
1::77::19::धर्मात्मा Illustrious, राम: Rama, पितु: father's, आज्ञाम् command, पुरस्कृत्य treating with respect, प्रियाणि pleasing, हितानि च of wellbeing welfare, पौरकार्याणि the duties towards citizens, सर्वश: all ones, चकार made.  
1::77::20::परमयन्त्रित: highly cotrolled and disciplined to his duties, मातृभ्य: for his mothers, मातृकार्याणि duties towards his mothers, कृत्वा having done, गुरूणाम् for adorable ones, गुरुकार्याणि duties towards Spiritual preceptors, काले काले at approprtiate times, अन्ववैक्षत supervised. 
1::77::21::एवम् in this way, रामस्य Rama's, शीलवृत्तेन with good conduct and character, दशरथ: Dasaratha, प्रीत: pleased, ब्राह्मणा: brahmanas, तथा also, नैगमा: inhabitants of the city, सर्वे all, विषयवासिन: the people of the country.
1::77::22:: लोके in this world, अतियशा: possessing great fame, सत्यपराक्रम: truthful and full of prowess, गुणवत्तर: possessing many greater virtues, राम: Rama, तेषाम् for the people of that kingdom, भूतानाम् for beings, स्वयम्भू: इव like Brahma, बभूव became.
1::77::23::मनस्वी the sensitive one, रामस्तु Rama, तद्गत: fixing his mind on Sita, तस्या: her, हृदि heart, नित्यम् always, समर्पित: dedicating, सीतया सार्धम् with Sita, बहून् many, ऋतून् seasons, विजहार went.
1::77::24::सीता Sita, पितृकृता by his father, दारा इति as wife, रामस्य Rama's, प्रिया became beloved, गुणात् because of virtues, रूपगुणाच्चापि by virtue of beauty as well, प्रीति: affection, भूय: again, अभ्यवर्धत developed. 
1::77::25::भर्ता her husband Rama, तस्या: her, हृदये heart, द्विगुणम् twice, परिवर्तते revolving, हृदयम् in heart, अन्तर्जातम् अपि every thought born inside also, हृदा with heart, व्यक्तम् clearly, आख्याति he will communicate.  
1::77::26::रूपे in beauty, देवताभि: with devatas, समा equal, रूपिणी (Sita) assuming the human form, श्रीरिव like Lakshmi, goddess of wealth, रूपिणी embodiment, मैथिली born in the city of Mithila, जनकात्मजा daughter of Janaka, सीता Sita, भूयो still, विशेषेण especially, तस्य in Rama's heart (परिवर्तते revolving).
1::77::27::राजर्षिसुत: son of rishi among kings Dasaratha, स: राम: that Rama, अभिरामया by the charming one, तया by her, उत्तमराजकन्यया excellent king Janka's daughter, समेयिवान्  united together, श्रिया with Lakshmi, अमरेश्वर: विभु: थord of devatas, विष्णु: इव like Visnu, (मुदा अन्वित: possessing joy), (अतीव) शुशुभे shone.
