1::4::1::भगवान् possessing divinity, आत्मवान् possessing spiritual wisdom, ऋषि: sage having the qualities of a poet, वाल्मीकि: Valmiki, प्राप्तराज्यस्य of him who gained the kingdom, रामस्य Rama's, विचित्रपदम् employing varied words causing astonishment, कृत्स्नम् entire, चरितम् history, चकार composed.
1::4::2::ऋषि: sage Valmiki, श्लोकानां चतुर्विंशत्सहस्राणि twenty four thousand verses, तथा and, पञ्च सर्गशतान् five hundred cantos, षट् काण्डानि six kandas, तथा and, उत्तरम् in addition Uttarakanda, उक्तवान् recite (composed).
1::4::3::महाप्राज्ञ: great intellectual, प्रभु: competent (capable of visualising the past, distant present and future)Valmiki, सहोत्तरम् including events of Uttarakanda(events subsequent to Rama's coronation), सभविष्यम् along with future events, तत् all that, कृत्वा having composed, एतत् this one, क: नु who indeed, प्रयुञ्जीयात् may translate into performance, इति in this way, चिन्तयामास reflected. 
1::4::4::तत: thereafter, मुनिवेषौ wearing the apparel of ascetic, कुशीलवौ two youngsters Kusa and Lava, चिन्तयमानस्य pondering over thus, भावितात्मन: of the honoured person, तस्य महर्षे: that sage Valmiki's, पादौ feet, अगृह्णीताम् touched.
1::4::5::धर्मज्ञौ the two had knowledge of dharma, राजपुत्रौ the two princes, यशस्विनौ well known, भ्रातरौ brothers, स्वरसम्पन्नौ endowed with good voice, आश्रमवासिनौ living in the  hermitage, कुशीलवौ (singers) Kusa and Lava, ददर्श saw them.
1::4::6::प्रभु: the master, स: that (Valmiki), मेधाविनौ endowed with intellect, वेदेषु in the knowledge of vedas, परिनिष्ठितौ accomplished, दृष्ट्वा having seen, वेदोपबृंहणार्थाय for the purpose of nourishing the vedas, तौ both of them, अग्राहयत got them initiated.
1::4::7::चरितव्रत: (Valmiki) one who practised religious vows, कृत्स्नम् entire, काव्यम् epic, रामायणम् the Ramayana, सीताया: महत् चरितम् Sita's great history, पौलस्त्यवधम् इत्येव the slaying of Paulastya etc, चकार composed.
1::4::8::गान्धर्वतत्त्वज्ञौ the twins who were well versed in music, मूर्छनास्थानकोविदौ learned in melody and pitch, भ्रातरौ the two brothers, स्वरसम्पन्नौ endowed with sweet voice, रूपिणौ assuming human form, गन्धर्वाविव like gandharvas, रूपलक्षणसम्पन्नौ possessed of handsome features, मधुरस्वरभाषिणौ of sweet tone in conversation, बिम्बात् from the  original image, रामदेहात् from the body of Rama, उद्धृतौ extracted, अपरौ बिम्बौ इव like other reflected images, तौ तु those two, पाठ्ये in recitation, गेये च in song, मधुरम् charming and attractive, त्रिभि: प्रमाणै: (सह) to the three measures of time (slow, moderate, quick), अन्वितम् having possessed of, सप्तभि: जातिभि: with seven notes, बद्धम् formed, तन्त्रीलयसमन्वितम् adopted time to stringed instruments, शृङ्गारकारुण्यहास्यवीरभयानकै: with the amorous, compassionate, humourous, courageous and fearful, रौद्रादिभिश्च and also violent etc., रसै: moods, संयुक्तम् endowed with, एतत् this, काव्यम् epic, अगायताम् chanted.
1::4::9::तौ राजपुत्रौ these two princes, धर्म्यम् based on dharma, उत्तमम् greatest, तत् सर्वम् आख्यानम् the entire epic, कात्स्नर्येन completely, वाचोविधेयम् committed to memory, कृत्वा having made, अनिन्दितौ blameless, तत्त्वज्ञौ well versed, सुसमाहितौ disciplined, यथोपदेशम् as instructed (by sage Valmiki), ऋषीणाम् of the ascetics, द्विजातीनाम् of the learned brahmins, साधूनां च of  saints also, समागमे in the meetings, जगतु: chanted.
1::4::10::महात्मानौ great persons, महाभागौ dignified ones, सर्वलक्षणलक्षितौ endowed with all good features, तौ both of them, कदाचित् on a particular occasion, समेतानाम् assembled at one place, भावितात्मनाम् of honoured ones, आसीनानाम् of those who were seated, ऋषीणाम् ascetics', समीपस्थौ standing in their presence, इदम् this, काव्यम् great epic, अगायताम् chanted.
1::4::11::सर्वे all, मुनय: sages, तत् श्रुत्वा having heard that, परम् great, विस्मयम् wonder, आगता: having experienced, बाष्पपर्याकुलेक्षणा: been overcome with tears of joy in their eyes, साधु साधु इति excellent, excellent, तौ about Kusa and Lava, ऊचु: exclaimed.
1::4::12::धर्मवत्सला: ते सर्वे all those who love dharma, मुनय: sages, प्रीतमनस: pleased, प्रशस्तव्यौ praiseworthy, गायमानौ while both of them were chanting, कुशीलवौ singers (Kusa and Lava), प्रशशंसु: praised.
1::4::13::गीतस्य of the song, माधुर्यम् melody, अहो how surprising, विशेषत: especially, श्लोकानामथ of verses, एतत् this history, चिरनिर्वृत्तमपि though happened long ago, प्रत्यक्षमिव as if  happening at the present moment, दर्शितम् is shown.
1::4::14::तौ उभौ both of them, सहितौ in unison, भावम् in theme, सुष्ठु excellently, प्रविश्य having entered, मधुरम् melodiusly, रक्तम् entrancing, स्वरसम्पदा sadja and other notes, सम्पन्नम् endowed with, सम्यक् very well, अगायताम् chanted.
1::4::15::तप: श्लाघ्यै: by ascetics who were commendable for their austerities, महात्मभि: by great sages, एवम् in this manner, प्रशस्यमानौ being praised, तौ both of them, संरक्ततरम् highly entrancing, अत्यर्थम् even with greater desire, मधुरम् sweetly, अगायताम् chanted.
1::4::16::कश्चित् some one from the assembly of, मुनि: sage, प्रीत: pleased, संस्थित: seated there, ताभ्याम् for both of them, कलशम् waterpitcher, ददौ gave, महायशा: renowned, कश्चित्  another one, प्रसन्न: delighted, वल्कलम् bark garment, ददौ gave.
1::4::17::मुनिना by sage Valmiki, सम्प्रकीर्तितम् has been told, इदम् this, आख्यानम् legendary poem, आश्चर्यम् is causing surprise, कवीनाम् for the poets, परम् supreme, आधारम् foundation, यथाक्रमम् according to specific rules  and order, समाप्तं च is  also completed. 
1::4::18::आयुष्यम् bestowing longevity, पुष्टिजनकम् causing nourishment (prosperity), सर्वश्रुतिमनोहरम् to all pleasing to hear, अभिगीतम् having sung well, इदम् this, गीतम् poem, प्रशस्यमानौ being admired, रथ्यासु in the streets, राजमार्गेषु in principal roads, सर्वत्र everywhere, गायकौ singers Kusa and Lava, सर्वगीतेषु among all kinds of songs, कोविदौ proficient, कदाचित् on one occasion, भरताग्रज: Sri Rama, ददर्श saw them.
1::4::19::तदा thereafter, शत्रुनिबर्हण: destroyer of enemies, स: राम: Rama, पूजार्हौ the twins deserving honour, भ्रातरौ brothers, कुशीलवौ Kusa and Lava, स्ववेश्म to his royal palace, आनीय having brought, पूजयामास extended respectful hospitality. 
1::4::20::परन्तप: tormentor of enemies, स: प्रभु: that Rama, सचिवै: by ministers, भ्रातृभिश्च by brothers, उपोपविष्ट: surrounded by, दिव्ये in a splendid, काञ्चने golden, सिंहासने throne, आसीन: was seated. 
1::4::21::नियत: selfpossessed, राम: Rama, तदा then, रूपसम्पन्नौ very handsome, तौ those, उभौ both of them, दृष्ट्वा having seen, लक्ष्मणम् Lakshmana, शत्रुघ्नम् Satrughna, तथा and, भरतम् Bharata, उवाच said.
1::4::22::देववर्चसो: of both possessing lustre of devatas, अनयो: of both of them, विचित्रार्थपदम्  portraying excellent sense and words, इदम् this, आख्यानम् poem, सम्यक् completely, श्रूयताम् let it be heard, तौ गायकौ those singers, अचोदयत् urged. 
1::4::23::तौ च both of them, मधुरम् melodiously, रक्तम् engaging, स्वञ्चितायतनिस्वनम् good and ample voice, तन्त्रीलयवत् tuning their stringed instruments, अत्यर्थम् greatly, विश्रुतार्थम् distinctly meaningful, अगायताम् chanted.  
1::4::24::श्रोत्राश्रयसुखम् comfortable to the sense of hearing, तत् that, गेयम् poem, जनसंसदि in the assembly of men, सर्वगात्राणि all the sense organs, मनांसि minds, हृदयानि च hearts also, ह्लादयत् rejoicing, बभौ shone.  
1::4::25::इमौ both these, मुनी sages, पार्थिवलक्षणान्वितौ endowed with attributes of royalty, कुशीलवौ चैव singers Kusa and Lava, महातपस्विनौ great ascetics, ममापि even for me, भूतिकरम् conducive to my welfare, महानुभावम् having great purport, तत् चरितम् that history, प्रवक्ष्यते  will be narrated, निबोधत listen with concentration of mind. 
1::4::26::तत: thereafter, तौ the two brothers, रामवच:प्रचोदितौ encouraged by words of Rama, मार्गविधानसम्पदा according to 'Marga' mode of singing, अगायताम् chanted, परिषद्गत: who was in the assembly, स: राम: अपि even Rama, शनै: बुभूषया desirous of having a peaceful mind, आसक्तमना: बभूव fixed their mind on chanting.
