1::52::1::Overwhelmed with joy the mighty, heroic Viswamitra upon seeing Vasishta, the greatest among ascetics, was and offered respectful salutations.  
1::52::2::Adorable Vasishta received Viswamitra with words of welcome and ordered a seat for him.
1::52::3::With the sagacious Viswamitra seated the great ascetic, duly offered him fruits and roots.
1::52::4::Foremost among kings, the brilliant Viswamitra, having received  hospitality from Vasishta, enquired about his welbeing his austerities, his firesacrifices, his disciples and trees (in his hermitage). Vasishta, too, informed him of the welfare of all.
1::52::5:: Vasishta, son of Brahma, the greatest among those who recite prayers and possess rich asceticism enquired of king Viswamitra comfortably seated (before him):
1::52::6::O King, is it all well with you? O righteous one O  heroic one are you ruling (your subjects) in accordance with the duties enjoined upon the king? Do you rule them in conformity with the code of moralit in order to make them happy.
1::52::7::Are your servants provided well with their requirements? Do they abide by your command? O Destroyer of foes have all your enemies been conquered ?
1::52::8::O Tormentor of enemies O Sinless one O Tiger among men is it all well with your army, treasury, friends, sons and grandsons?
1::52::9::Highly brilliant king Viswamitra, humbly informed Vasishta that all was well.
1::52::10::Both the righteous personalities dwelt at length on various matters and interesting anecdotes with great delight and derived mutual pleasure. 
1::52::11::O Descendent of Raghu at the end of the conversation, venerable Vasishta, smiling as it were said to Viswamitra
1::52::12::O Highy powerful Viswamitra I wish to offer appropriate hospitality to you and to your incomparable army. Be pleased to accept it.
1::52::13:: Please accept the honour I extend. Being a king, you are a distinguished guest. you deserve to be treated respectfully in all possible ways.
1::52::14::To these words of Vasishta, the great intellectual Viswamitra said, you have spoken pleasing words. This in itself is hospitality for me.
1::52::15::O Worshipful one O Profoundly wise one you are worthy of homage. You have excellently honoured me in all possible ways with whatever fruits and roots available in your hermitage, with water for washing feet and for sipping. You have permitted me darshan with your revered self. I shall leave (now). My regards Look upon me with eyes of friendship.
1::52::16::As the king was addressing thus the righteous and generous Vasishta, repeatedly requested him to accept his hospitality.
1::52::17::The son of Gadhi said to Vasishta, O Preeminent among sages, be it so, O venerable one they will be done.
1::52::18:: Vasishta who was highly brilliant the greatest among those who meditate (on Brahman) and free from sins was pleased. Thereafter he called the speckled cow (Kamadhenu): 
1::52::19::O Sabala, come on quick Listen to my words. I have decided to honour this royal saint and his army with excellent food. Make necessary arrangemets.
1::52::20::O Kamadhenu quickly entertain them for my sake with the food of six kinds of tastes (varieties of rich dishes) as desired by each. 
1::52::21::O Sabala create at once all food items consisting of liquids and solids for drinking, tasting and siping.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे द्विपञ्चाशस्सर्ग:।Thus ends the fiftysecond sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
