1::49::1::तत: thereafter, अफल: having been deprived of his testacles, शक्र: Indra, त्रस्तवदन: with freightened face, सर्षिस्सङ्घान् with groups of rishis, सचारणान् with charanas, अग्निपुरोगमान् with Agni in the forefront, देवान् addressing devatas, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::49::2::महात्मन: magnanimous, गौतमस्य Gautama's, क्रोधम् wrath, उत्पाद्य evoking, तपस: austerities, विघ्नम् obstacles, कुर्वता while creating, मया by me, इदम् this, सुरकार्यम् the work of celestials, कृतम् has been done. 
1::49::3::तेन by his, क्रोधात् wrath, अफल: deprived of testacles, कृत: अस्मि I been made, सा च also she, निराकृता was rejected, महता great, शापमोक्षेण by conferring curse, अस्य his, तप: ascetic energy, मया by me, अपहृतम् has been stolen.
1::49::4::तस्मात् for that reason, सर्षिसङ्घा: with hosts of rishis, सचारणा: with charanas, सर्वे all, सुरवरा: excellent devatas, सुरसाह्यकरम् for the benefit of devatas, सफलम् restoration of my testicles, कर्तुम् to do, अर्हथ it is your duty.
1::49::5::साग्निपुरोगमा: with Agni in the forefront, देवा: devtas, शतक्रतो: Indra's (performer of one hundred sacrifices), वच: words, श्रुत्वा having heard, सर्वे all, मरुद्गणै: सह accompanied by hosts of maruts, पितृदेवान् pitrudevatas, उपेत्य having approached, आहु: said.
1::49::6::अयम् this, मेष: the ram, सवृषण: has testicles, शक्र: Indra, अवृषण: is without testicles, कृत: हि has been rendered, मेषस्य ram's, वृषणौ testicles, गृह्य taking, आशु immediately, शक्राय for Indra, प्रयच्छथ furnish.
1::49::7::अफल: without testicles, कृत: made, मेष: the ram, भवताम् for you, पराम् great, तुष्टिम् joy, प्रदास्यति will give, ये मानवा: those men, दास्यन्ति will give, हर्षणार्थाय for causing delight.
1::49::8::समागता: assembled, पितृदेवा: pitrudevatas, अग्ने: Agni's, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा having heard, मेषवृषणौ testicles of ram, उत्पाट्य extracting, सहस्राक्षे for Indra, न्यवेशयन् grafted.
1::49::9::काकुत्स्थ O Kakutstha, समागता: assembled, पितृदेवा: pitrudevatas, तदा प्रभृति then onwards, अफलान् without genitals, मेषान् rams, भुञ्जते accepted as offerings, तेषाम् their, फलै: their testicles, अयोजयन् having fitted.
1::49::10::राघव O Rama, महात्मन: illustrious, गौतमस्य Gautama's, तपस: ascetism, प्रभावेन with the power of, इन्द्र: तु Indra, तदाप्रभृति thenceforth, मेषवृषण: च testicles of ram. 
1::49::11::महातेज: O Highly lustrous Rama, तत् therefore, पुण्यकर्मण: of the pious one, आश्रमम् hermitage of Gautama, आगच्छ enter, महाभागाम् fortunate, देवरूपिणीम् woman of divine appearance, एनाम् this, अहल्यां Ahalya, तारय liberate.
1::49::12::सहलक्ष्मण: along with Lakshmana, राघव: Rama, विश्वामित्रवच: the words of Visvamitra, श्रुत्वा having listened, अथ thereafter, विश्वामित्रम् Viswamitra, पुरस्कृत्य keeping him ahead, तम् that, आश्रमम् hermitage, आविशत् entered.
1::49::13::महाभागाम् highly fortunate, तपसा with the power of ascetism, द्योतितप्रभाम् shining brilliantly, लोकैरपि by men, सुरासुरै: by suras or asuras, समागम्य joined together, दुर्निरीक्ष्याम् incapable of being seen, धात्रा by lord Brahma, प्रयत्नात् with special efforts, निर्मिताम् created, दिव्याम् divine, मायामयीमिव looking like illusory image, तुषारावृताम् covered by mist, साभ्राम् with clouds, पूर्णचन्द्रप्रभामिव looking like brightness of full moon, अम्भस: in the sky, मध्ये in the midst, दुराधर्षाम् inviolable, दीप्ताम् shining, सूर्यप्रभामिव like brightness of sun, स: Rama, ददर्श beheld.
1::49::14::सा she, गौतमवाक्येन with the words of Gautama, रामस्य Rama's, दर्शनम्यावत् till the appearance of Rama, त्रयाणामपि लोकानाम् even for three worlds, दुर्निरीक्ष्या incapable of being seen by any, बभूव ह became.
1::49::15:: शापस्य curse's, अन्तम् end, उपागम्य having reached, तेषाम् their, दर्शनम् appearance, आगता obtained, तत: afterwards, राघवौ Rama and Lakshmana, तदा then, तस्या: her, पादौ feet, जगृहतु: touched.
1::49::16::सा च she also, गौतमवच: words of Gautama, स्मरन्ती recalling, तौ them, प्रतिजग्राह received with due honours, सुसमाहिता with concentration of mind and attention, पाद्यम् water for washing feet, अर्घ्यम् offerings of reverence, तथा and, आतिथ्यम् hospitality, विधिदृष्टेन according to tradition, कर्मणा by acts, चकार performed, काकुत्स्थः Kakusthsa, प्रतिजग्राह received.
1::49::17::देवदुन्दुभिनिस्वनै: amidst sounds of divine kettle drums, महती great, पुष्पवृष्टि आसीत् flowers rained, गंधर्वाप्सरसाम् चैव of gandharvas and apsarasas also, महान् great, समागम: union  आसीत् took place.
1::49::18::गौतमस्य Gautama's, वशानुगाम् in the possession of, तपोबलविशुद्धाङ्गीम् her body purified by the power of penance, ताम् that, अहल्याम् Ahalya, देवा: devatas, साधु साधु इति 'Excellent', 'Excellent', समपूजयन् exclaimed.
1::49::19::महातपा: possessed of great ascetism, महातेजा: highly glorious, गौतमोऽपि Gautama also, अहल्यासहित: accompanied by Ahalya, सुखी full of joy, रामम् Rama, विधिवत् according to tradition, सम्पूज्य having worshipped, तप: austerities, तेपे performed.
1::49::20::रामोऽपि Rama also, गौतमस्य महामुने: of the great ascetic Gautama, सकाशात् from him, परमाम् great, पूजाम् hospitality, विधिवत् according to tradition, प्राप्य having received, मिथिलाम् towards Mithila, जगाम had gone. 
