1::44::1::Thereupon that king followed by Ganga reached the ocean and entered the lower regions of the earth where the sons of Sagara were found reduced to ashes.
1::44::2::After the ashes were inundated by the waters of Ganga, Brahma, lord of the world,   appeared before king Bhagiratha and said:
1::44::3::O Tiger among men sixty thousand sons of illustrious Sagara having been liberated, had gone towards heaven like devatas.
1::44::4::O King as long as the waters in the ocean exist in this world, shall the sons of Sagara, live in heavens like gods.
1::44::5::This Ganga will become your eldest daughter and from now on she will be wellknown in this world (as Bhagirathi) after your name.
1::44::6:: O King divine Ganga will be called Tripathaga as well as Bhagirathi. Since she flows in the three worlds (heaven, earth and the lower world: Patala), she will be known as Tripathaga.
1::44::7::O Lord of men O King you may offer the waters of  Ganga here to all your ancestors and thereby fulfil your vow.
1::44::8::O King by the highly renowned ancestors of yours, the foremost among righteous ones (even Sagara) this desire has not been fulfilled.  
1::44::9::O Child similarly though Anshuman possessed unparalleled prowess in this world his prayer to Ganga, his vow could not be fulfilled.
1::44::10::O Sinless one (Bhagiratha) O Distinguished one on the part of Dilipa brilliant your father who had the virtuous of a rajarshi, who was equal to a maharshi in splendour, and to me in austerities and abiding to the duties of a kshatriya it was even not possible to bring Ganga through prayer.
1::44::11::O Best among men you have fulfilled that vow. You have achieved supreme renown and reverence in this world. 
1::44::12:: O Destroyer of enemies by bringing about the descent of Ganga, you have secured a great abode in dharma.
1::44::13::O Best among men O Tiger among men take a dip in the eternally sacred waters,  purify yourself and acquire holiness.
1::44::14::O King perform the rites of all your forefathers with the waters (of Ganga), farewell. I shall return to my world (now). Go back, O King (said Grandsire)
1::44::15::The illustrious rajarshi Bhagiratha, performed the rites of offering the sacred water of Ganga, in accordance with proper order and tradition for the sons of Sagara. Purified with the ablutions entered his own city. O Best of the Raghus his desire thus fulfilled he continued to rule the kingdom thereafter. 
1::44::16::O Best of the Raghus the world rejoiced having Bhagiratha as king. With his purpose achieved, he was freed from all mental afflictions and sorrows and thereafter lived happily.
1::44::17::O Rama I have related you the story of Ganga in detail. Evening time is passing by (and we shall perform the ablutions) farewell.
1::44::18::He will be blessed with fame, longevity, progeny and (after death) heaven brahmins One who recites this story of Ganga to the kshatriyas and others, the gods and his forefathers would be pleased with him.
1::44::19::O Son of the Kakusthas whosoever listens to this auspicious story relating to the descent of Ganga with concentration, all his desires will be achieved, his sins will be destroyed and his longevity and fame will increase.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे चतुश्चत्वारिंशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the fortyfourth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
