1::20::1::राजशार्दूल: great king, विश्वामित्रस्य Visvamitra's, तत् भाषितम् those words, श्रुत्वा having heard, मुहूर्तमिव for a moment, निस्संज्ञ: lost his senses, संज्ञावान् regained his consciousness, इदम् अब्रवीत् thus spoke.
1::20::2::राजीवलोचन: lotuseyed, मे राम: my Rama, ऊनषोडशवर्ष: in lessthan sixteen years of age, अस्य for him, राक्षसै:सह with the rakshasas, युद्धयोग्यताम् abilities to fight in a battle, न पश्यामि I do not see.
1::20::3::पूर्णा completely, इयम् अक्षौहिणी this Akshauhini, यस्या: for which, अहं I, पति: am the lord, ईश्वर: sustainer, अनया with this Akshauhini, संवृत: accompanied  by, गत्वा having gone, अहं I, तै:निशाचरै: with those night rangers, rakshasas, योद्धा will engage in the battle.
1::20::4::मे भृत्या: my servants, इमे these warriors, शूराश्च also valiant, विक्रान्ता: powerful, अस्त्रविशारदा: those skilled in use of weapons, रक्षोगणै: multitude of rakshasas, योद्धुम् to engage in battle, योग्या: are fit, रामम् Rama, नेतुम् नार्हसि not proper on your part to take him.
1::20::5::अहमेव I myself, धनुष्पाणि: with a bow in hand, गोप्ता will protect, यावत् as long as, प्राणान् my life, धरिष्यामि I sustain, तावत् till such time, समरमूर्धनि on the battlefield, निशाचरै: with rakshasas, योत्स्ये will engage in the battle.
1::20::6::अहम् I, तत्र there, आगमिष्यामि shall come, सा व्रतचर्या that observance of vows,सुरक्षिता will be well protected, निर्विघ्ना without obstacles, भविष्यति will continue, रामम् Rama, नेतुम् to take, नार्हसि it is not proper on your part.
1::20::7::हि indeed, बाल: a child, अकृतविद्यश्च is not learned in the science of warfare, बलाबलम् strengths and weaknesses, न वेत्ति does not know, अस्त्रबलसंयुक्त:च न  has not acquired the strength of weapons, युद्धविशारद: च न not proficient in warfare, असौ he, रक्षसाम् of  rakshasas, योग्य:न is not qualified, ते those rakshasas, ध्रुवम् certainly, कूटयुद्धा: हि are  deceitful in battle.
1::20::8::रामेण from Rama, विप्रयुक्त: separated, मुहूर्तमपि even for a moment, जीवितुम् to live, नोत्सहे I do not like, मुनिशार्दूल O Best of ascetics, रामम् Rama, नेतुम् to take, नार्हसि it is not proper on your part (You should not take).
1::20::9::सुव्रत O Sage of excellent vows, ब्रह्मन् O Brahman, वा or, राघवम् Rama, नेतुम् to take him, इच्छसि you are intending, चतुरङ्गसमायुक्तम् my army consiting of elephants, chariots, cavalry and infantry, मया च सहितम् along with me, नय you may take.
1::20::10::कौशिक O Scion of Kusika family, जातस्य having born, मम for me, षष्टि: sixty, वर्षसहस्राणि thousand years passed, अयम् this Rama, दु:खेन with great efforts, उत्पादित: is obtained,  रामम् Rama, नेतुम् to take him, नार्हसि it is not proper for you.
1::20::11::चतुर्णाम् among the four, आत्मजानाम् sons, मम for me, परमिका great, प्रीति: हि affection           indeed, ज्येष्ठम् eldest, धर्मप्रधानम् च with virtue as prime qualification, रामम् Rama, नेतुम् to take, नार्हसि it is not proper.
1::20::12::मुनिपुङ्गव O Best of sages, ते राक्षसा: those rakshsas, किंवीर्या how powerful?, कस्य whose, पुत्रा: sons?, ते they, के who?, कथंप्रमाणा: how much is the size of their body, एतान् them, के who, रक्षन्ति are protecting.
1::20::13::ब्रह्मन् O Brahman, कूटयोधिनाम् of those treacherous and deceitful warriors, तेषाम् रक्षसाम् in the matter of those rakshasas, रामेण by Rama, मामकै: my, बलै: वा with forces, मया वा by me, कथम् how, प्रतिकर्तव्यम् to retaliate.
1::20::14::भगवन् O Venerable one, दुष्टभावानाम् of the wicked natured, तेषाम् of them, मया by me, रणे in the battle, कथम् how, स्थातव्यम् to stay, सर्वम् all this matter, मे to me, शंस tell, राक्षसा: rakshasas, वीर्योत्सिक्ता: proud of their prowess, तस्य his, तत् वचनम् those words, श्रुत्वा having heard, विश्वामित्र: Viswamitra, अभ्यभाषत spoke.      
1::20::15::पौलस्त्यवंशप्रभव: born in the illustrious race of Pulastya, रावणो नाम by name Ravana, राक्षस: rakshasa, महाबल: of great strength, महावीर्य: of great prowess, स: he, ब्रह्मणा by Brahma, दत्तवर: by boon granted, बहुभि: by several, राक्षसै: by rakshasas, वृत: accompanied, त्रैलोक्यम् three worlds, भृशम् excessively, बाधते is tormenting.
1::20::16::साक्षात् evidently, वैश्रवणभ्राता brother of Kubera, विश्रवस:मुने: ascetic Visrava's, पुत्र: son, राक्षसाधिप: king of rakshasas, रावण: Ravana, महावीर्य: of great prowess, श्रूयते it is heard.
1::20::17::महाबल: he, possessing great strength, यदा when, स्वयम् on his own, यज्ञस्य for sacrifice, विघ्नकर्ता न does not create impediments, तेन by, सञ्चोदितौ prompted, मारीचश्च Maricha, सुबाहुश्च Subahu, द्वौ राक्षसौ two rakshasas, यज्ञविघ्नम् obsctacles of sacrifice, करिष्यत: cause.
1::20::18::इति in this manner, तेन मुनिना by that sage, उक्त: spoken, राजा king Dasaratha, तदा then, मुनिम् addressing the sage, उवाच said, सङ्ग्रामे in the battle, तस्य दुरात्मन: of that evil minded one, स्थातुम् to stand, शक्त: न अस्मि I am not capable.
1::20::19::धर्मज्ञ O Knower of truth, स:त्वम् such of you, मम to me, पुत्रके in the little son, अल्पभाग्यस्य of the unfortunate, मम च in my matter, प्रसादम् favour,  कुरुष्व extend, गुरु: spiritual preceptor, भवान् you, दैवतं हि verily god.
1::20::20::देवदानवगन्धर्वा: gods, danavas and gandharvas, यक्षा: yakshas, पतगपन्नगा: birds and great serpents, युधि in the battle, रावणम् Ravana, सोढुम् to endure him, न शक्ता: are not capable, मानवा: men, किं पुन: again to say.
1::20::21::स: राक्षस: that rakshasa, युधि in the battle, वीर्यवताम् of the warriors, वीर्यम् prowess, आदत्ते हि takes, मुनिश्रेष्ठ O Foremost of ascetics, सबलो वा either with forces, मम आत्मजै:सहितो वा or together with my sons, अहम् I, तेन with him, तस्य बलै:वा  or with his forces, संयोद्धुम् to engage in battle, न शक्तोऽस्मि I am not competant.
1::20::22::ब्रह्मन् O Brahman, अमरप्रख्यम् resembling celestial deities, सङ्ग्रामाणाम् in the warfare, अकोविदम् not experienced, बालं पुत्रकम् dear young child, मे my, तनयम् son, कथमपि how so ever, नैव दास्यामि I never, never give him.
1::20::23:: अथ and, ते you, यज्ञविघ्नकरौ those causing obstacles to sacrifice, सुन्दोपसुन्दयो: of Sunda and Upasunda, सुतौ तौ sons, युध्दे in the battle, कालोपमौ resemble god of death, Yama, पुत्रकम् my son, नैव दास्यामि I shall never part with him. 
1::20::24::मारीचश्च Maricha, सुबाहुश्च Subahu, वीर्यवन्तौ possessed of prowess, सुशिक्षितौ experienced  in warfare, अहम् I, ससुहृद्गण: with my best friends, तयो: in them, अन्यतरेण with one of them, योध्दा स्याम् can combat.
1::20::25::इति in this manner, नरपतिजल्पनात् with the statements of king Dasaratha, द्विजेन्द्रम् Indra among ascetics, कुशिकसुतम् son of Kusika, सुमहान् great, मन्यु: rage, विवेश entered, महर्षिवह्नि: fire in the form of maharshi, मखे in the sacrifice, सुहुत: with good offerings of  oblation, आज्यसिक्त: sprinkled with clarified butter, अग्नि:इव like  sacrificial fire, उज्वलित: समभवत् blazed.  
