1::25::1:: On hearing the excellent words of Viswamitra, a sage with unimaginable faculty. Rama, the tiger among men (Rama) replied in a, gentle voice:
1::25::2::O best of ascetics, I have heard the yakshas possess little prowess. How can a woman who is by gender weak possess the strength of a thousand elephants?
1::25::3:: Viswamitra said, Listen, how she acquired the prowess and strength by virtue of a boon she received.
1::25::4::In the past there was a powerful and great yaksha by name Suketu. He had no  children. So he performed an intense penance following virtuous practices.  
1::25::5::Rama the grandsire Brahma was highly gratified and granted to the king of yakshas, the gem of a daughter by name known asTataka.
1::25::6::The illustrious grandsire Brahma granted her the strength of a thousand elephants, but did not bestow a son on the yaksha. 
1::25::7:: As she grew up, glowing with youth and beauty she was given in marriage to Sunda, son of Jharjha.   
1::25::8::After some time that yakshini gave birth to an unassailable son by name Maricha. Because of a curse, he became a rakshasa (though born of yaksha parentage).
1::25::9:: O Rama when Sunda died Tataka along with her son wanted to attack Agastya, the best of sages.
1::25::10::Roaring, she rushed with excitement to devour him. The venerable  rishi Agastya saw her approaching him and cursed Maricha to assume form of a demoness.
1::25::11::Mighty angry, Agastya cursed Tataka saying, 'Abandon this form of a great yakshini and assume the terrible figure of a rakshasi, a cannibal with distorted appearance and a hideous countenance'.
1::25::12:: Enraged at the curse, senseless, Tataka with anger, has been ravaging this sacred land when Agastya walked.
1::25::13::O Rama for the welfare of cows and brahmins, slay this yakshini who is wicked, extremely cruel and possessing vile prowess.
1::25::14::O son of Raghu's dynasty she is maligned by the curse, and so not a single man in the three worlds except you, is  competent to slay this yakshini. 
1::25::15:: O best among men you need not hate killing a woman. You are a prince. You should serve the interest of the four orders of the society. 
1::25::16::Whether cruel or kind, sinful or wrong whatever contributes to the protection of the subjects, should be done by the righteous (king).
1::25::17::This is the eternal law binding those who are appointed to bear the burden of a kingdom. O Kakutstha kill her. She knows no dharma. 
1::25::18::O Prince It is heard that in the past Indra slew Manthara, Virochana's daughter who intended to destroy the earth.
1::25::19::O Rama in olden times, the mother of Kavya and the wife of sage Bhrigu, determined to make this world devoid of Indra was destroyed by Visnu.
1::25::20::O Prince by these magnanimous persons and by great men several unrighteous women were killed for the common good.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे पञ्चविंशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the twentyfifth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
