1::52::1::महाबल: very mighty, वीर: heroic, स: विश्वामित्र: that Visvamitra, जपताम् वरम् greatest among those performing religious prayers, वसिष्ठम् Vasishta, दृष्ट्वा having seen, परमप्रीत: exceedingly happy, विनयात् out of respect, प्रणत: offered respectful salutations.  
1::52::2::तव to you, स्वागतम् इति welcome (saying so), महात्मना by the magnanimous, वसिष्ठेन by Vasishta, उक्तश्च spoken also, भगवान् adorable, वसिष्ठ: Vasishta, अस्य for him, आसनं च  seat also, व्यादिदेश ह ordered.
1::52::3::तदा then, मुनिवर: excellent  of ascetics, उपविष्टाय having seated, धीमते sagacious, विश्वामित्राय for Visvamitra, यथान्यायम् in accordance with tradition, फलमूलम् fruits and roots, उपाहरत् offered.
1::52::4::राजसत्तम: foremost among kings, महातेजा: highly splendrous, विश्वामित्र: Visvamitra, वसिष्ठात् from Vasishta, ताम् पूजाम् that hospitality, प्रतिगृह्य having received, तपोग्निहोत्रशिष्येषु with regard to his austerities, his firesacrifices and his disciples, तथा and, वनस्पतिगणे trees (in his hermitage), कुशलम् welfare, पर्यपृच्छत enquired, वसिष्ठ: च Vasishta also, सर्वत्र in all of them, कुशलम् welfare, राजसत्तमम् for the best of kings, आह informed.
1::52::5::जपताम् among those performing religious prayers, श्रेष्ठ: greatest, महातपा: possessing great asceticism, ब्रह्मण: Brahma's, सुत: son, वसिष्ठ: Vasishta, सुखोपविष्टम् sitting at ease, राजानम् king, विश्वामित्रम् Visvamitra,पप्रच्छ enquired.
1::52::6::राजन् O King, ते कुशलम् कच्चित् is it well with you?, धार्मिक O Righteous one, वीर O Heroic one, प्रजा: subjects, धर्मेण conforming to morality, रञ्जयन् delighting, राजवृत्तेन in accordance with the duties enjoined upon the king, पालयसे कच्चित् are you ruling?
1::52::7::कच्चित् whether, ते your, भृत्या: servants, सम्भृता: are well provided? शासने in your commands, तिष्ठन्ति abide?, रिपुसूदन O Destroyer of foes, ते your, रिपव: foes, सर्वे all, विजिता: have been conquered.  
1::52::8::कच्चित् whether, परन्तप O Tormentor of enemies, अनघ O Sinless one, नरव्याघ्र O Tiger (best) among men, बलेषु in your army, कोशेषु in your treasury, मित्रेषु in your friends, तव your, पुत्रपौत्रे sons and grandsons, ते कुशलम् is it well with you?  
1::52::9::महातेजा: highly lustrous, राजा king, विश्वामित्र: Visvamitra, वसिष्ठम् Vasishta, विनयान्वित: with great discipline, वसिष्ठम् प्रति addressing Vasishta, सर्वत्र all that, कुशलम् welfare, उदाहरत् conveyed.
1::52::10::धर्मिष्ठौ virtuous, तौ उभौ both of them, परमया with great, मुदा delight, युक्तौ abosrbed, सुचिरम् कालम् for a long time, शुभा: auspicious, ता: कथा: anecedotes relating to various matters, कृत्वा having made, परस्परम् each other, प्रीयेताम् were pleased.
1::52::11::रघुनन्दन O Descendent of Raghu, तत: then, भगवान् venerable, वसिष्ठ: Vasishta, कथाऽन्ते after the conversation had ended, प्रहसन्निव smiling as it were, विश्वामित्रम् addressing Viswamitra,  इदं this, वाक्यम् word, उवाच spoke. 
1::52::12::महाबल O Highly powerful, अस्य of this, बलस्य for army, अप्रमेयस्य incomparable, तव चैव to you as well, यथार्हम् in an appropriate manner, आतिथ्यम् hospitality, कर्तुम् to offer, इच्छामि I am desirous, मे from me, सम्प्रतीच्छ you may accept.
1::52::13::भवान् you, मया by me, उद्यताम् extended, सत्क्रियाम् honours, प्रतीच्छतु accept, राजा king, त्वम् you, प्रयत्नत: through every effort, पूजनीय: worthy of, अतिथिश्रेष्ठ: distinguished guest.
1::52::14::वसिष्ठेन by Vasishta, एवम् in this manner, उक्त: spoken, महामति: greatminded, राजा king, विश्वामित्र: Visvamitra, त्वया by you, प्रियवाक्येन with pleasing words, कृतम् इति  hospitality has been extended, मे to me, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::52::15::भगवन् O Worshipful one, यत् which, तव your, आश्रमे in the hermitage, विद्यते is available, फलमूलेन with fruits and roots, पाद्येन with the water for washing feet, आचमनीयेन च with water for sipping, भगवद्दर्शनेन by meeting  your revered self, पूजार्हेण worthy of homage, सर्वथा in all ways, सुपूजित: excellently honoured, महाप्राज्ञ O Profoundly wise one, गमिष्यामि   I shall go, ते नम: अस्तु reverence to you, मैत्रेण filled with friendship, चक्षुषा with eyes, ईक्षस्व look upon me.
1::52::16::एवम् in this way, ब्रुवन्तम् speaking, राजानम् king, धर्मात्मा righteous minded, उदारधी: sagacious, वसिष्ठ: Vasishta, पुनरेव in return, पुन: पुन: again and again, न्यमन्त्रयत implored.
1::52::17::गाधेय: the son of Gadhi, वसिष्ठम् addressing Vashishta, मुनिपुङ्गव O Preeminent among sages, बाढम् be it so, भगवत: venerable, यथा in whatever way,  प्रियं (अभिमतम्) desire, तथा अस्तु let it be done in that way.
1::52::18::महातेजा: highly splendrous, जपतां वर: greatest among those who perform religious meditation, धूतकल्मष: free from sins, वसिष्ठ: Vasishta, प्रीत: pleased, तत: thereafter, कल्माषीम् the speckled cow, आजुहाव called.
1::52::19::शबले O Sabala, क्षिप्रम् quickly, एहि (एहि) come on, मम my,  वच: words, श्रृणु च अपि also listen, अहम् I, महार्हेण in a befitting manner, भोजनेन with food, अस्य राजर्षे: for this royal saint, सबलस्य together with his army, सत्कारम् honour, कर्तुम् to extend, व्यवसित: अस्मि I have decided, मे to me, संविधत्स्व make arrangemets.
1::52::20::कामधुक् O Kamadhenu, यस्य यस्य  to whom so ever, षड्रसेषु among six kinds of tastes, अभिपूजितम् which is desired, तत्सर्वम् all that, यथाकामम् in a manner desired, मम कृते for my sake, क्षिप्रम् quickly, अभिवर्ष rained (grant).
1::52::21::शबले O Sabala, in the form of liquid, अन्नेन with solid food, रसेन पानेन with liquids  which can be drunk, लेह्यचोष्येण which can be licked and sipped, संयुतम् endowed with, सर्वम् all that, अन्नानां of the food items, निचयम् in collecion, सृजस्व create, त्वर hasten.
