1::22::1::Vasishta having said thus, king Dasaratha, with cheerful countenance summoned Rama and Lakshmana.  
1::22::2::Rama was given farewell by his parents with recitation of mantras (for securing prosperity and averting evils). Priest Vasishta sanctified him with mantras Dasaratha kissed his son on the forehead and delivered him to the care of Viswamitra, with a heart full of cheer.
1::22::3::At the sight of the lotuseyed Rama accompanying Viswamitra, the wind blew pollenfree with a gentle touch.
1::22::4::The departure of glorious Viswamitra was greeted with incessant showers of flowers, the beating of celestial drums and the blowing of conches.
1::22::5::Viswamitra walked in the forefront. Behind him was Rama, bow in hand, while in the archer, Sumitra's son (Lakshmana) with side locks of hair followed.
1::22::6::Rama and Lakshmana equipped with bows and quivers resembled three hooded serpents. Warriors of no less prowess, they illuminated the ten quarters and followed the high souled Viswamitra like twin Aswanikumaras  following the grandsire, Brahma. 
1::22::7::Then bows in hand, wellattired, their fingers encased in mongrel skin, for protection (against the bowstring) armed with scimitars, resplendent, young, handsome the two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana shone unblemished. As they followed sage Viswamitra spreading radiance, they looked like sons of the god of fire, (Skanda and Visakhu) following the  incomprehensible Siva.  
1::22::8::After crossing a distance of over half a yojana on the southern bank of Sarayu, Viswamitra addressed Rama sweet in a gentle voice.
1::22::9::O child, take this water (in your hands), let there be no delay. You will receive from me a collection of mantras and also bala and atibala. 
1::22::10:: (If you receive these mantras), you will experience neither fatigue, nor fever nor will there be a change in your appearance. Whether you are asleep or agitated, rakshasas cannot harm you.
1::22::11::O Rama, there is none in this world equal to the might of your hands nor does such a person exist in the three worlds.   
1::22::12::O sinless one, there is none in this world equal to you in good fortune, kindness, wisdom, in taking a decsion or giving a reply.
1::22::13::With these two kinds of knowledge secured, there will be none equal to you, at present or in fututre. Bala and atibala are  mother to all kinds of knowledge .
1::22::14::O Rama, best among men, scion in the line of Raghu, on your way you will not feel hunger or thirst if you recite bala and atibala.
1::22::15::O Rama, born in the line Kakutstha and one who is righteous, these two radiant sciences are daughters of the grandsire Brahma. If you pursue these two sciences, you will get unequalled fame. You are a fit person to confer these two sciences.
1::22::16::You possess all these qualities in great measure. There is no doubt that If  these two sciences (mantras) are nourished with austerities they will assume multiple forms (and benefit you).
1::22::17::Thereafter Rama, touched the water and was sanctified. With a cheerful face he received those two sciences from the maharshi who had perceived the supreme soul.  
1::22::18::.Rama, the highly heroic  after acquiring knowledge (of the two sciences) and having rendered all services to preceptor Viswamitra, appeared resplendent like the Sungod in autumn. There the three of them spent the night comfortably on the bank of Sarayu.
1::22::19::The night was spent as though with comfort  by the two eminent sons of Dasaratha, who shared the unaccustomed bed of grass. They were kept in good humour by the words of Kusika's son.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे द्वाविंशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the twentysecond sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana  the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
