1::21::1::तस्य king Dasaratha's, स्नेहपर्याकुलाक्षरम् affectionfilled confused letters, तत् वचनम् those words, श्रुत्वा having heard, कौशिक: Visvamitra, समन्यु: with anger, महीपतिम् addressing  the king, वाक्यम् words, प्रत्युवाच replied.
1::21::2::पूर्वम् formerly, अर्थम् object or thing, प्रतिश्रुत्य having promised, प्रतिज्ञाम् that promise, हातुम् to break, इच्छसि your are desirous, अयं विपर्यय: in contrariety (breach of vow), राघवाणाम्  Raghu's, अस्य कुलस्य in the race of, अयुक्त: improper.
1::21::3::राजन् O King, इदम् this act of yours, ते to you, क्षमं यदि if appropriate, यथाऽगतम् from where I have come, गमिष्यामि I shall go, काकुत्स्थ OScion of the race of Kakutstha, मिथ्याप्रतिज्ञ: proving false to your promise, सबान्धव: along with your relatives, सुखीभव be happy.   
1::21::4::धीमत: of the wise, तस्य विश्वामित्रस्य that Visvamitra's, रोषपरीतस्य seized of wrath, कृत्स्ना entire, वसुधा earth, चचाल had shaken, सुरान् devatas, भयम् fear,  विवेश gripped.
1::21::5::सुव्रत: adherent of ascetic practices, धीर: steadfast in his duty, महान् ऋषि: great Rishi, वसिष्ठ: Vasishta, सर्वम् जगत् entire world, त्रस्तरूपम् freightened form, विज्ञाय knowing, नृपतिम् addressing the king, वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवीत् said:
1::21::6::इक्ष्वाकूणां कुले in the line of  Ikshvaku, जात: born, साक्षात् truely, अपर: another, धर्म: इव god of righteousness (personified), धृतिमान् firm, सुव्रत: observing excellent vows, श्रीमान् auspicious one, धर्मम् virtuousness, हातुम् to abandon, न अर्हसि you are not fit. 
1::21::7::राघव O Dasaratha, धर्मात्मा इति as righteousminded, त्रिषु लोकेषु in three worlds, विख्यात:, reputed, स्वधर्मम् your own duty, प्रतिपद्यस्व observe, अधर्मम् unjust act, वोढुम् to endure, न अर्हसि not worthy of you.
1::21::8::राघव O Dasaratha, एवं करिष्यामि इति I shall do so, संश्रुत्य having promised, अकुर्वाणस्य for one who does not fulfill, इष्टापूर्तवध: भूयात् destruction of merits earned through pious acts of sacrifice and other charitable acts, तस्मात् for that reason, रामम् Rama, विसर्जय send him.
1::21::9::कृतास्त्रम् trained in the use of arms, अकृतास्त्रं वा or untrained,  कुशिकपुत्रेण by Viswamitra, गुप्तम् protected, एनम् this Rama, ज्वलनेन by flaming fire, अमृतं यथा like divine nectar, राक्षसा: rakshasas, न शक्ष्यन्ति will not be able to compete.  
1::21::10::एष: Visvamitra, विग्रहवान् embodiment, धर्म: righteousness, एष: Visvamitra, वीर्यवताम् of those possessing prowess, वर: excellent, एष: Visvamitra, बुध्या in intellect, लोके in this world, अधिक: surpasses, तपस: in asceticism, परायणम् last resort (supreme refuge).
1::21::11::एष: this one, विविधान् various kinds of, अस्त्रान् weapons, वेत्ति knows, सचराचरे among all animate and inanimate beings, त्रैलोक्ये in three words, अन्य: पुमान् no other man, एनं न वेत्ति does not know him, केचन none, न वेत्स्यन्ति are not going to know about him in future.
1::21::12::देवा: devatas, न(वेत्स्यन्ति) will not be able to know how to use weapons, ऋषय: rishis, केचित् न none knows, असुरा: nor asuras, राक्षसा: न nor rakshasas, सकिन्नरमहोरगा: along with kinnaras or mighty serpants, गन्धर्वयक्षप्रवरा: nor gandharvas nor best of yakshas.    
1::21::13::भृशाश्वस्य Bhrisasva's, परमधार्मिका: highly virtuous, पुत्रा: sons, सर्वास्त्राणि they also, यदा when, पुरा formerly, राज्यम् kingdom, प्रशासति ruling, कौशिकाय for Viswamitra, दत्ता: were given.  
1::21::14::प्रजापतिसुतासुता: grand sons of Prajapati, भृशाश्वस्य Bhrisasva's, पुत्रा: sons, तेऽपि as the weapons, नैकरूपा: of diverse forms, महावीर्या: highly energetic, दीप्तिमन्त: full of glory, जयावहा: bring victory. 
1::21::15::जया च Jaya, सुप्रभा च and Suprabha, सुमध्यमे of slender waists, दक्षकन्ये the two daughters of Daksha, ते they, अस्त्रशस्त्राणाम् of Astras and Shastras(weapons for striking and throwing arms and missiles), परमभास्वरम् effulgent, शतम् one hundred, सुवाते gave birth to sons (named as Samharas). 
1::21::16::पुरा formerly, जया नाम named Jaya, असुरसैन्यानाम् for asura army, वधाय for the destruction, अमेयान् immeasurable prowess, कामरूपिण: possessing power of changing forms at free will, वरान् boon, पञ्चाशतम् fifty, सुतान् sons, लेभे obtained. 
1::21::17::सुप्रभापि Suprabha also, दुर्धर्षान् unassailable, दुराक्रमान् invincible, बलीयस: morepowerful, संहारान् नाम Samhara by name पुन: still, पञ्चाशतम् fifty, पुत्रान् sons, अजनयत्  gave birth.
1::21::18::एष: कुशिकात्मज: this Visvamitra, तानि अस्त्राणि these weapons, यथावत् very well, वेत्ति knows, धर्मवित् virtuous, स: भूय: he also, अपूर्वाणाम् of new weapons, जनने च in creation, शक्त: capable.  
1::21::19::महातेजा: highly effulgent, महायशा: highly renowned, विश्वामित्र: Visvamitra, एवं वीर्य: has  such prowess, राजन् O King, रामगमने to send Rama, संशयम् doubt, कर्तुम् to entertain, नार्हसि it is not proper for you.
1::21::20::कुशिकात्मज: son of Kusika, स्वयं च by himself, तेषाम् of those rakhsasas, निग्रहणे in  repressing, शक्त: capable, तव your, पुत्रहितार्थाय welfare of your son, त्वाम् you, उपेत्य having reached, अभि याचते begs.
1::21::21::रघुवृषभ: the foremost of Raghus, इति in this manner, मुनिवचनात् by the words of sage Vasishta, प्रसन्नचित्त: with composed mind, भास्वराङ्ग: has a shining body, मुमोद well pleased, प्रथितयशा: one with manifested fame, कुशिकात्मजाय for Visvamitra, राघवस्य गमनम् for taking Rama, बुध्या with his mind, अभिरुरोच consented.
