1::53::1::O Destroyer of foes (Rama) addressed thus by Vasishta the wishfulfilling Sabala satisfied each one's  desires.
1::53::2::Sugarcane, honey and fried grain, invigorating liquors in good containers, excellent drinks and varieties of food (were served).
1::53::3::Heaps of hot rice as high as mountains, savoury food, condiments and on abundance of curd, various kinds of soups, containers in their thousands completely filled with edibles with all six tastes and preparations made of jaggery (were distributed).
1::53::4:: O Rama, Vasistha entertained everybody in Viswamitra's army to their full satisfaction. They were all wellfed and happy.
1::53::5::King Viswamitra along with ladies, priests and brahmins including the royal sage were fully satisfied and delighted.
1::53::6::Having received the hospitality along with his counsellors, ministers and attendants, Viswamitra, filled with great delight, said to Vasishta:
1::53::7::O Brahman you are worthy of worship. I was received with reverence and wellentertained by you. O Sage conversant with speech listen.
1::53::8:: I shall give you a hundred thousand cows in exchange for Sabala. O Respectable one this cow is a gem. A king (along) has a right on jewels, O Brahmin, for that reason, Sabala rightfully belongs to me. Therefore, give this cow.
1::53::9::Addressed the by Viswamitra venerable and righteous Vasishta who was of the earth  ascetic replied:  
1::53::10::O King I shall not exchange Sabala for a hundred thousand for even or a hundred crore cows or heaps of silver.
1::53::11::O Suppressor of enemies Viswamitra it is not proper to separate this cow from me. The relationship between Sabala and me is permanent like the relationship between a  righteous man and his fame.
1::53::12::For havyam (oblations to gods) and kavyam (oblations to ancestors), for fulfilling the necessities of life, maintenance of the sacred fire and offering oblations to all spirits of created beings, and for offerings made to the Firegod I depend on this cow.
1::53::13::O Royal saint swaha and vashat and various branches of learning are all dependent on this cow. No doubt about it.
1::53::14::This one is truly my whole possession, it always gives me contentment. O King for various reasons, I will not give Sabala to you.
1::53::15::To there words of Vasishta, Viswamitra who is skilful in conversation reacted with extreme excitement:
1::53::16::I shall give fourteen thousand elephants with gold trappings around the neck and girth,  and with goads made of gold. 
1::53::17:: I shall give you eight hundred chariots made of gold and decorated with small tinkling bells, each chariot yoked with four white horses. 
1::53::18:: O Maharshi of auspicious vows I shall give you eleven thousand mighty horses of good breed born in good countries.
1::53::19::I shall give one crore young cows of various colours. Give me Sabala.  
1::53::20::O Best of brahmins I shall offer you jewels or gold as much as you desire. I shall give you everything. Give this Sabala to me.
1::53::21::To these words of sagacious Viswamitra the adorable Vasishta replied: O King I shall not give Sabala.
1::53::22::This is verily my jewel, my wealth my very life. This is allinall for me.  
1::53::23::O King verily this Sabala is useful for my darsa and purnamasa sacrifices, for appropriate gifts and various rites.
1::53::24:: O King this (cow) is undoubtedly the source of all my actions. Why these useless words? I will never give this wishfulfilling cow.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे त्रिपञ्चाशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the fiftythird sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
