1::34::1::राघव O Rama, तस्मिन् ब्रह्मदत्ते when that Brahmadatta, कृतोद्वाहे got married, गते had gone, अपुत्र: king without sons, पुत्रलाभाय in order to obtain a son, पौत्रीम् इष्टिम् Putreshti, अकल्पयत् performed.
1::34::2::तदा then, इष्ट्याम् when Putreshti, वर्तमानायाम् was being performed, परमोदार: highly generous, ब्रह्मसुत: son of Brahma, कुश: Kusa, कुशनाभमहीपतिम् king Kusanabha, उवाच spoke.
1::34::3::पुत्र O My son, ते सदृश: similar to yourself, सुधार्मिक: highly virtuous, पुत्र: son, भविष्यति will be born, गाधिम् named Gadhi, प्राप्स्यसि you will obtain, तेन by him, त्वम् you, शाश्वतीम्  everlasting, लोके in this world, कीर्तिं च fame also (will obtain).
1::34::4::राम O Rama, कुश: Kusa, महीपतिम् king, कुशनाभम् Kusanabha, एवम् in this way, उक्त्वा having spoken, आकाशम् the sky, आविश्य having entered, सनातनम् eternal, ब्रह्मलोकम् Brahmaloka, जगाम had gone.  
1::34::5::अथ thereafter, कस्यचित्कालस्य after sometime, धीमत: of the sagacious, कुशनाभस्य Kusanabha's, परमधर्मिष्ठ: supremely righteous one, नामत: by name, गाधि: इत्येव known as Gadhi, जज्ञे was born.
1::34::6::काकुत्स्थ O Rama, परमधार्मिक: highly virtuous, स: गाधि: Gadhi, मम पिता my father, रघुनन्दन O Rama, कुशवंशप्रसूत: born in the family of Kusa, कौशिक: अस्मि I am known as Kausika.
1::34::7::राघव O Rama, सुव्रता adherent of best religious practices, नाम्ना by name, सत्यवती नाम as Satyavati, मम my, पूर्वजा भगिनी elder sister, ऋचीके for Richika, प्रतिपादिता was bestowed.
1::34::8::भर्तारम् her husband, अनुवर्तिनी following, सशरीरा with human body, स्वर्गम् heaven, गता had gone, परमोदारा highly generous, कौशिकी named Kausiki, महानदी sacred river, प्रवृत्ता च flowed.
1::34::9::लोकस्य for the world, हितकामार्थम् for the welfare and pleasure, प्रवृत्ता flowed, दिव्या divine, पुण्योदका sacred waters, रम्या beautiful, मम my, भगिनी sister, हिमवन्तम् Himavat mountain, उपाश्रिता took asylum.
1::34::10::रघुनन्दन O Rama, तत: then onwards, भगिन्याम् in my sister, कौशिक्याम् in Kausiki, स्नेहसंयुक्त: possessed of affection, अहम् I, निरत: enjoying, हिमवत्पार्श्वे on the side of Himavat mountain, सुखम् happily, वसामि I am living.
1::34::11::सा सत्यवती that Satyavati, पुण्या sacred, सत्ये in truth, धर्मे in righteousness, प्रतिष्ठिता established, पतिव्रता chaste, महाभागा holy, सरितां वरा best among rivers, कौशिकी Kausiki.
1::34::12::राम Rama, अहम् हि I indeed, नियमात् for religious observance, तां हित्वा leaving her, समुपागत: have come, सिद्धाश्रमम् Siddha ashrama, अनुप्राप्य having reached, तव by your, तेजसा valour, सिद्ध: अस्मि I have fulfilled my desire.
1::34::13::महाबाहो O Mighty armed one, राम O Rama, एषा मम this is my, स्वस्य वंशस्य my family's,  देशस्य च of the place also, उत्पत्ति: origin, कीर्तिता narrated, यत् which, त्वम् you, माम् me, परिपृच्छसि are asking for.
1::34::14::काकुत्स्थ O Rama, मम for me, कथा: stories, कथयत: while narrating, अर्धरात्र: midnight, गत: has passed by, निद्राम् sleep, अभ्येहि acquire, ते भद्रम् prosperity to you, इह here, न: for us, अध्वनि on the way, विघ्न: obstacles, माभूत् let not take place.
1::34::15::रघुनन्दन O Rama, सर्वे तरव: all trees, निष्पन्दा: are motionless, निलीन मृगपक्षिण: with beasts and birds resting calmed, दिशश्च all directions, नैशेन relating to night, तमसा with the darkness, व्याप्ता: pervaded.
1::34::16::सन्ध्या evening time, शनै: gradually, वियुज्यते is separated, नक्षत्रतारागहनम् filled with stars and planets, नभ: sky, ज्योतिर्भि: इव as if with shining stars, नेत्रै: eyes, आवृतम् इव like covered, भासते is shining.
1::34::17::विभो O Rama, शीतांशु: having cool rays, शशि moon, लोकतमोनुद: dispelling the darkness of world, प्रभया with moon light, लोके in this world, प्राणिनाम् of the living beings, मनांसि minds, ह्लादयन् delighting, उत्तिष्ठति is rising higher and higher.
1::34::18::नैशानि nocturnal, सर्वभूतानि all living beings, यक्षराक्षससङ्घाश्च groups of yakshas and rakshasas, रौद्रा: dreadful, पिशिताशनाश्च eaters of human flesh, ततस्तत: here and there, प्रचरन्ति are moving. 
1::34::19::महातेजा: highly lustrous, महामुनि: great ascetic, एवम् उक्त्वा having spoken in this way, विरराम rested, सर्वे मुनय: all sages, साधु साधु इति well said, well said, thus, तम् him, अभ्यपूजयन् praised.
1::34::20::कुशिकानाम् of  those belonging to the family  of Kusa, अयम् वंश: this is the dynasty, महान् venerable, सदा always, धर्मपर: devoted to virtue, कुशवंश्या: belonging to Kusa dynasty, नरोत्तमा: foremost of men, महात्मान: highly revered,  ब्रह्मोपमा: similar to god Brahma.
1::34::21::महायशा: highly illustrious, विश्वामित्र: Visvamitra, भवानेव you, yourself, विशेषेण especially (you are similar to Brahma), सरिताम् among rivers, श्रेष्ठा the best, कौशिकी Kausiki, तव your, कुलोद्योतकरी brightening the image of your dynasty.
1::34::22::इति In this way, तै: by them, मुनिशार्दूलै: by the best of ascetics, प्रशस्त: praised, श्रीमान् the auspicious one, कुशिकात्मज: son of Kusika, श्रीमान् the lustrous, अंशुमान् Sun, अस्तगतमिव setting behind Asta mountains, निद्राम् sleep, उपागमत् obtained.
1::34::23::सह सौमित्रि: along with Lakshmana, रामोऽपि Rama also, किञ्चित् little, आगतविस्मय: with  surprise, मुनिशार्दूलम् to the best of ascetics, प्रशस्य praising, निद्राम् sleep, समुपसेवते enjoyed.
