1::29::1::अथ thereafter, तत् वनम् about that forest, परिपृच्छत: while he was enquiring, अप्रमेयस्य of the man of immeasurable prowess, तस्य of Rama, महातेजा highly lustrous, विश्वामित्र: Visvamitra, व्याख्यातुम् to explain, उपचक्रमे commenced.
1::29::2::महाबाहो O Mighty armed one, राम Rama, इह here, देववर: the formost of gods, प्रभु: highly competent, सुमहातपा: great ascetic, विष्णु: lord Vishnu, सुबहूनि innumerable, वर्षाणि years, युगशतानि hundreds of yugas, तपश्चरणयोगार्थम् for carrying out yogic practices and penance, उवास lived.
1::29::3::राम O Rama, एष: this place, महात्मन: of the glorious, वामनस्य Vamana's, पूर्वाश्रम: formerly  hermitage of, सिद्धाश्रम: Siddhashrama, इति thus, ख्यात: known, हि indeed, महातपा: great ascetic, अत्र here, सिद्ध: succeeded in his ascetic pratices.
1::29::4::एतस्मिन् काले एव during this period itself, वैरोचनि: the son of Virochana, राजा king बलि: Bali, सेन्द्रान् with Indra, समरुद्गणान् together with host of Maruts, दैवतगणान् host of devatas, निर्जित्य having vanquished, त्रिषु in three, लोकेषु worlds, विश्रुत: famed, तत् राज्यम् that kingdom, कारयामास ruled.
1::29::5::बले: when emperor Bali, यजमानस्य while he was performing the sacrifice, साग्निपुरोगमा: with Agni in the forefront, देवा: devas, इह in this, आश्रमे hermitage, विष्णुम् lord Vishnu, स्वयम् personally, समागम्य having got together, ऊचु: uttered these words.
1::29::6::विष्णो O Visnu, वैरोचनि: son of Virochana, बलि: Bali, उत्तमम् excellent, यज्ञम् sacrifice, यजते is performing, तस्मिन् क्रतौ in that sacrifice, असमाप्ते before being completed, स्वकार्यम् our purpose, अभिपद्यताम् let it be achieved.
1::29::7::ये याचितार: those seekers of favours, इतस्तत: from here and there, एनम्  him, अभिवर्तन्ते  approach, यच्च whichever, यत्र wherever, यथावच्च in whatever manner, सर्वम् all that, तेभ्य: for them, प्रयच्छति is granting. 
1::29::8::विष्णो O Visnu, स: त्वम् such a god as you are, सुरहितार्थाय for the welfare of devatas, मायायोगम् by act of illusion, उपागत: have assumed, वामनत्वम् गत: assuming  dwarfness, उत्तमम् supreme, कल्याणम् auspicious act, कुरु perform.
1::29::9::राम O Rama, एतस्मिन् अन्तरे in the meantime, अग्निसमप्रभ: resplendent as fire, ओजसा with supreme lustre, दीप्यमान इव as if radiating with, भगवान् worshipful, काश्यप: Kashyapa, अदित्या सहित: in the company of Aditi, दिव्यं वर्षसहस्रकम् a thousand divine years, व्रतम् vow, समाप्य having completed, वरदम् conferer of boons, मधुसूदनम् Madhusudana, तुष्टाव extolled.
1::29::10::तपोमयम् endowed with extremely great ascetisism, तपोराशिम् a mass of Tapas, तपोमूर्तिम् embodiment of Tapas, तपात्मकम् made of great Tapas, पुरुषोत्तमम् O Purushottama, त्वाम् you, सुतप्तेन with well performed, तपसा with penance, पश्यामि I am beholding you.
1::29::11::प्रभो O Lord, तव your, शरीरे in the body, इदम् this, सर्वं जगत् entire universe, पश्यामि I am beholding, त्वम् you, अनादि beginingless, अनिर्देश्यः indescribable, अहम् I, त्वाम् you, शरणं गत: taking refuge.
1::29::12::हरि: Visnu, प्रीत: is pleased, धूतकल्मषम् with sins removed, तं काश्यपम् addressing that Kashyapa, उवाच said, वरम् boon, वरय ask for, ते भद्रम् may you prosper, वरार्ह: worthy of receiving boon, मम for me, मत: असि dear to me. 
1::29::13::तस्य his, तत् वचनम् those words, श्रुत्वा having heard, मारीच: son of Maricha, काश्यप: Kashyapa, अब्रवीत् spoke, वरद O Bestower of boons, सुव्रत man of excellent vows, अदित्या: for Aditi, देवतानां च for devatas also, अनुयाचत: following all of them soliciting, मम च for me also, सुप्रीत: well pleased, वरम् boon, दातुम् अर्हसि it behoves of you to grant.
1::29::14::भगवन् O Adorable one, अनघ O Blemishless one, अदित्या: for Aditi, मम च and for me, पुत्रत्वम् become the son, गच्छ obtain, असुरसूदन O Destroyer of asuras, त्वम् you, शक्रस्य Indra's, यवीयान् younger, भ्रता brother, भव become, शोकार्तानाम् for those stricken with  sorrow, देवानाम् for devatas, साहाय्यम् help, कर्तुम् अर्हसि you are fit to do.
1::29::15::देवेश O Lord of celestials, कर्मणि why my penance, सिद्धे is accomplished, अयम् this one, ते your, प्रसादात् by graciousness, सिद्धाश्रमो नाम by the name of Siddhaashrama, भविष्यति  will become, भगवन् O Worshipful one, इत: from here, उत्तिष्ठ arise.
1::29::16::अथ then, महातेजा: highly resplendent one, विष्णु: Vishnu, अदित्याम् from the womb of Aditi, समजायत was born, वामनं रुपम् form of Vamana, आस्थाय assuming, वैरोचनिम्  emperor Bali,the son of Virochana, उपागमत् approached.
1::29::17::अथ thereafter, मानद: giver of selfrespect, लोकात्मा the soul of the universe, सर्वभूतहिते रत: engaged in the welfare of all living beings, त्रीन् three, क्रमान् footsteps, भिक्षित्वा having solicited, प्रतिगृह्य च and having received, लोकान् the  worlds, आक्रम्य having occupied, बलिम् Bali, ओजसा with his energy, नियम्य having restrained, महेन्द्राय for Mahendra, पुन: again, प्रादात् gave, महातेजा:स: that highly lustrous Visnu, त्रैलोक्यम् three worlds, पुन: again, शक्रवशम् in the possession of Mahendra, चक्रे made.
1::29::18::श्रमनाशन: extinguishing the fatigue, एष:आश्रम: this ashrama, तेन by Vamana, पूर्वम् formerly, आक्रान्त: occupied, तस्य वामनस्य that Vamana's, भक्तय with devotion, मयापि by me also, एष: this ashrama, उपभुज्यते is enjoyed.
1::29::19::पुरुषव्याघ्र OBest among men, विघ्नकारिण: those causing obstacles, रक्षसा: rakshasas, एतम् आश्रमम् this ashrama, आयान्ति are coming, दुष्टचारिण: the wicked ones, अत्रैव here alone, हन्तव्या: are fit to be killed.
1::29::20::राम O Rama, अद्य now, अनुत्तमम् the excellent, सिद्धाश्रमम् Siddha ashrama, गच्छामहे shall go तात O Child, तत् that, एतत् this same one, आश्रमपदम् ahrama, मम to me, यथा as, तवापि even for you, तथा in the same way.
1::29::21::आश्रमपदम् the hermitage, प्रविशन् while entering, महामुनि: the great ascetic, गतनीहार: cleared of mist, पुनर्वसुसमन्वित: in conjunction with Punarvasu star, शशीव like moon, व्यरोचत was shining.
1::29::22::सिद्धाश्रमनिवासिन: inhabitants of Siddha ashrama, मुनय: ascetics, सर्वे all, तं दृष्ट्वा having seen him, उत्पत्त्य उत्पत्त्य having jumped out, सहसा immediately, विश्वामित्रम् Visvamitra, अपूजयन् worshipped.
1::29::23::धीमते to the sagacious, विश्वामित्राय Visvamitra, यथार्हम् in a fitting manner, पूजाम् honours, चक्रिरे extended, तथैव in the same manner, राजपुत्राभ्याम् for both the princes, अतिथिक्रियाम् hospitality, अकुर्वन् extended.
1::29::24::अथ thereafter, अरिन्दमौ destroyers of enemies, राजपुत्रौ two princes, रघुनन्दनौ Rama and Lakshmana bringing glory to Raghu's race, मुहूर्तम् for a while, विश्रान्तौ having taken rest, प्राञ्जली with folded palms, मुनिशार्दूलम् addressing best of asetics,Visvamitra, ऊचतु: spoke.
1::29::25::मुनिपुङ्गव O Foremost of ascetics, अद्यैव today itself, दीक्षाम् initiation ceremony, प्रविश enter, ते भद्रम् May you prosper, अयं सिद्धाश्रम: this siddha ashrama, सिद्ध:स्यात् may attain  perfection, तव वच: your words, सत्यम् अस्तु shall become truthful.
1::29::26::एवम् in this manner, उक्त:spoken, महातेजा: the highly lustrous, विश्वामित्र: Visvamitra, महान् ऋषि: great ascetic, तदा then, नियत: engaged in the religious observance, नियतेन्द्रिय: with restrained senses, दीक्षाम् initiation ceremony, प्रविवेश entered.
1::29::27::कुमारौ अपि the two princes also, तां रात्रिम् during that night, सुसमाहितौ with well composed minds, उषित्वा having dwelt, प्रभातकाले at daybreak, उत्थाय having woken up, स्पृष्टोदकौ having touched water, शुची cleansed themselves, पूर्वां सन्ध्याम् morning ablutions, उपास्य having performed, नियमेन in accordance with prescribed rules, जप्यम्  reciting prayers, समाप्य having completed, हुताग्निहोत्रम् one who has kindled sacrificial fire, आसीनम् seated, विश्वामित्रम् Visvamitra, अवन्दताम् paid their homage.
