1::26::1::दृढव्रत: a man firm in his vows, नरवरात्मज: the son of the foremost of men, राघव: Rama, अक्लीबम् determined, manly and bold, मुने: ascetic's, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा having listened, प्राञ्जलि:भूत्वा with folded palms, प्रत्युवाच replied.
1::26::2::पितु: of my sire, वचननिर्देशात् to fulfil the words of command, पितु: of my sire's, वचनगौरवात् to honour his words, कौशिकस्य Kausika's, वचनम् इति the words as such, अविशङ्कया without hesitation, कर्तव्यम् fit to be done.
1::26::3::अयोध्यायाम् in Ayodhya, गुरुमध्ये in the presence of elders, महात्मना by the magnanimous, पित्रा father, दशरथेन by Dasaratha, अहम् I, अनुशिष्ट: अस्मि have been ordered, तद्वच: his words, नावज्ञेयं हि cannot be disobeyed(turned down).
1::26::4::स: अहम्  such as I am, पितु: father's, वच: words, श्रुत्वा having heard, ब्रह्मवादिन: of the man  endowed with the knowledge of vedas, शासनात् in accordance with the command, उत्तमम् the welcoming act, ताटकावधम् slaying of Tataka, करिष्यामि I shall perform, सन्देह: न no doubt.
1::26::5::गोब्राह्मणहितार्थाय for the welfare of cows and brahmins, अस्य देशस्य this country's, सुखाय च  for the happiness, अप्रमेयस्य of the man possessing boundless energy, तव your, वचनम् words, कर्तुम् to perform, उद्यत: I am prepared.
1::26::6::अरिन्दम: destroyer of enemies, एवम् उक्त्वा having spoken thus, धनुर्मध्ये in the middle of the bow, मुष्टिम् the fist, बद्वा clinching, शब्देन with sounds, दिश: ten cardinal directions,   नादयन् sounding, तीव्रम् severe, ज्याशब्दम् with twanging sounds of the bowstring, अकरोत्  performed.
1::26::7::ताटकावनवासिन: all the beings living in that Tataka forest, तेन शब्देन with that sound, वित्रस्ता: were terrified, ताटका च Tataka also, तेन शब्देन by that sound, सुसंक्रुद्धा was furious with anger, मोहिता amazed.
1::26::8::राक्षसी rakshasi, तं शब्दम् that sound, श्रत्वा having heard, क्रोधमूर्छिता infatuated with anger, अभिनिध्याय thought for a while, यत: from which direction, शब्द: sound, विनिस्सृत: originated(in that direction), वेगात् speedily, अभ्यद्रवत् rushed.
1::26::9::स:राघव: Rama, क्रुद्धाम् full of wrath, विकृताम् disfigured, विकृताननाम् with distorted face, प्रमाणेन in size, अतिवृद्धां च gigantic, तां दृष्ट्वा having seen her, लक्ष्मणम् addressing Lakshmana, अभ्यभाषत spoke.
1::26::10::लक्ष्मण O Lakshmana, यक्षिण्या: yakshini's, भैरवम् dreadful, दारुणम् hideous, वपु: body,पश्य behold, अस्या: her, दर्शनात् from the appearance, भीरूणाम् of the timid, हृदयानि hearts, भिद्येरन् will break.
1::26::11::दुराधर्षाम् unassailable, मायाबलसमन्विताम endowed with strength gained through black magic, एनाम् her, हृतकर्णाग्रनासिकाम् deprive her of ears and tip of nose, विनिवृत्ताम् turned away, अद्य now, करोमि I shall do, पश्य see. 
1::26::12::स्त्रीस्वभावेन by virtue of being a woman, रक्षिताम् is protected, एनां हन्तुम् to slay her, न उत्सहे I am not inclined, अस्याम् in her, वीर्यम् prowess, गतिं चापि power of motion, हनिष्यामीति I will destroy, thus, मे मति: this is my opinion.
1::26::13::रामे when Rama, एवम् in this manner, ब्रुवाणे was speaking thus, ताटका Tataka, क्रोधमूर्छिता infatuated with anger, बाहू both her arms, उद्यम्य uplifting, राममेव towards Rama, गर्जन्ती roaring, अभ्यधावत rushed.
1::26::14::ब्रह्मर्षि: Brahmarshi, विश्वामित्रस्तु Visvamitra, ताम् her, हुङ्कारेण with a Hunkara (menacing sound), अभिभर्त्स्य threatened, राघवयो: for Rama and Lakshmana, स्वस्ति अस्तु May there be aupicousness, जयंचैव victory also, अभ्यभाषत spoke.
1::26::15::सा ताटका that Tataka, घोरम् fearful, रज: dust, उद्धून्वाना throwing up, राघवौ उभौ both Rama and Lakshmana, मुहूर्तम् for a moment, महता with a great, रजोमोहेन with dust employed to confound them, व्यमोहयत् bewildered.
1::26::16::तत: then, मायाम् the power of magic, समास्थाय assuming, सुमहता with an extensive  शिलावर्षेण with rain of boulders, राघवौ on both Rama and Lakshmana, अवाकिरत् showered, तत: then, राघव: Rama, चुक्रोध was filled with wrath.
1::26::17::राघव: Rama, तस्या: her, महत् mighty, शिलावर्षम् rain of rocks, शरवर्षेण with volleys of arrows, प्रतिहत्य retaliating, उपधावन्त्या: while she was running towards him, करौ both her hands, पत्रिभि: with arrows, चिच्छेद cut off.
1::26::18::तत: then, छिन्नभुजाम् with her hands chopped, श्रान्ताम् tired, अभ्याशे in the nearby place, परिगर्जतीम् roaring, सौमित्रि: Lakshmana, क्रोधात् with indignation, हृतकर्णाग्रनासिकाम् अकरोत् cut off her ears and nose. 
1::26::19::अन्तर्धानं गता vanishing from the sight, यक्षी that yakshi, मोहयन्तीव as if deluding, मायया  with the power of magic, कामरूपधरा capable of assuming forms at will , सद्य: immediately, अनेकश: in various ways, रूपाणि forms , कृत्वा having assumed, अश्मवर्षम् rain of heavy rocks, विमुञ्चन्ती releasing, भैरवम् frightfully, विचचार ह moving about.
1::26::20::तत: then, समन्तत:on all sides, अश्मवर्षेण with rain of stones, कीर्यमाणौ being thrown out, तौ Rama and Lakshmana, दृष्ट्वा having seen, श्रीमान् auspicious, गाधिसुत: son of Gadhi, इदं वचनम् these words, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::26::21::राम Rama, ते to you, घृणया out of compassion, अलम् enough, पापा sinful, दुष्टचारिणी wicked woman, यज्ञविघ्नकरी obstructor of sacrifice, एषा यक्षी this yakshi, मायया by magic power, पुरावर्धति will regain with strength.
1::26::22::सन्ध्या Dusk, पुरा प्रवर्तते is approaching, तावदेव before that time, एषा वध्यताम् she may be killed, सन्ध्याकालेषु during evening time, रक्षांसि rakshasas, दुर्धर्षाणि भवन्ति वै  become unassailable.
1::26::23::इति in this manner, उक्त: addressed, स: Rama, तदा then, शब्दवेधित्वम् skill in targetting the object by the sound, दर्शयन् exhibiting, अश्मवृष्ट्या with rain of stones, अभिवर्षतीम् showering, ताम् यक्षीम् that yakshi, सायकै: with arrows, रुरोध prevented. 
1::26::24::शरजालेन with multitude of arrows, रुद्धा prevented, मायाबलसमन्विता possessed of magical  powers, सा that female demon, विनेदुषी roaring, काकुत्स्थम् Rama, लक्ष्मणं च also Lakshmana, अभिदुद्राव advanced.
1::26::25::विक्रान्ताम् advancing powerully, अशनीमिव like to a thunderbolt, वेगेन with speed, आपतन्तीम्  approaching, ताम् her, शरेण with arrow, उरसि in the chest, विव्याथ pierced,  सा पपात she fell down, ममार च also died.
1::26::26::तदा then, सुरपति: Indra, सुराश्च other celestial beings, हताम् slain, भीमसङ्काशाम् of terrible appearance, तां दृष्ट्वा having seen her, साधु साधु इति well done, well done saying so, काकुत्स्थम् Rama, समपूजयन् worshipped.
1::26::27::अथ then, सहस्राक्ष: the thousandeyed, पुरन्दर: Devendra, परमप्रीत: was exceedingly pleased, उवाच said, सर्वे all, सुराश्च celestial beings, संहृष्टा: were delighted, विश्वामित्रम् addressing Viswamitra, अब्रुवन् spoke.
1::26::28::कौशिकमुने O Ascetic Kausika, ते to you, भद्रम् may prosperity be to you, सेन्द्रा: together   with Indra, सर्वे all, मरुद्गणा: devatas, अनेन कर्मणा by this act of Rama, तोषिता: have been gratified, राघवे towards Rama, स्नेहम् friendship, दर्शय show.
1::26::29::ब्रह्मन् O Brahmarshi, प्रजापते: Prajapati's, भृशाश्वस्य Brishaswas', पुत्रान् sons, सत्यपराक्रमान् men of truthful prowess, तपोबलभृत़ः men endowed with ascetic energy, राघवाय for Rama, निवेदय offer. 
1::26::30::ब्रह्मन् O Brahmarshi, तव अनुगमने in following you, धृत: firm, ते to you, पात्रभूत:च worthy to receive, राजसूनुना by this prince, सुराणाम् for the benefit of celestial beings, महत् many, कर्म task, कर्तव्यं च have to be accomplished.
1::26::31::एवम् in this manner, उक्त्वा having said these words, सुरा: celestial beings, सर्वे all, हृष्टा: were pleased, विश्वामित्रम् Visvamitra, पुरस्कृत्य having honoured him, यथागतम् from where they had come from, जग्मु: returned, तत: then, सन्ध्या dusk, प्रवर्तते commences(ed).   
1::26::32::तत: then, मुनिवर: best of ascetics, प्रीत: rejoiced, ताटकावधतोषित: pleased with slaying of Tataka , रामम् Rama, मूर्ध्नि on the head,  उपाघ्राय having smelt fondly , इदं वचनम् this  word, अब्रवीत् spoke.  
1::26::33::शुभदर्शन O Auspicious looking one, राम Rama, अद्य today, रजनीम् this night, इह here, वसेम we will live, श्व: tomorrow, प्रभाते in the morning, मम my, तत् आश्रमपदम् that  hermitage, गमिष्याम: we shall proceed.
1::26::34::विश्वामित्रवच: words of Visvamitra, श्रुत्वा having heard, दशरथात्मज: son of Dasaratha, हृष्ट: rejoiced, तत्र there, ताटकाया: Tataka's, वने in the forest, सुखम् happily, रजनीम् night, उवास lived.
1::26::35::तदा then, तस्मिन् अहनि एव on that day itself, तत् वनं च that forest also, मुक्तशापम् freed  from the curse, चैत्ररथम् known as Chitraratha, वनम् forest, यथा the samemanner, रमणीयम् charming, विबभ्राज shone.
1::26::36::स: राम: that Rama, तां यक्षसुताम् that daughter of that yaksha, निहत्य having slain, सुरसिद्धसङ्घै: by the  multitude of devatas and siddhas, प्रशस्यमान: having been praised, मुनिना सह along with sage, Visvamitra, तस्मिन्नेव in the same forest, प्रभातवेलाम् at the first glimpse of dawn, प्रतिबोध्यमान: having been awakened, उवास lived.
