1::74::1::अथ afterwards, रात्र्याम् when the night, व्यतीतायाम् had passed away, स: that, महामुनि: great ascetic, विश्वामित्र: Visvamitra, राघवान् born in the race of Raghu, कुमारान् च princes, आशीर्भि: with blessing, पूरयित्वा having filled, तौ those two, राजानै kings, आपृष्ट्वा having taken leave of them, उत्तरपर्वतम् northern mountains, जगाम went.
1::74::2::विश्वामित्रे when Visvamitra, गते had departed, अथ thereafter, राजा one who causes joy to his people, दशरथ: राजा king Dasaratha, मिथिलाधिपम् lord of Mithila, वैदेहम् king Janaka, आपृष्ट्वा taking leave of him, आशु speedily, पुरीम् to city of Ayodhya, जगाम went.
1::74::3::नराधिप: king Janaka, गच्छन्तम् while going, तम् that, राजानम् king Dasaratha, अन्वगच्छत् followed, अथ thereafter, विदेहानाम् lord of Videhas, राजा king Janaka, बहु plenty of, कन्याधनम् gifts to his daughters, ददौ gave.
1::74::4::कन्यापिता father of brides, मिथिलेश्वर: lord of Mithila, गवाम् of cows, बहूनि several, शतसहस्राणि hundred thousands, मुख्यानाम् of excellent, कम्बलानाम् carpets, क्षौमकोट्यम्बराणि च crores of silk garments, हस्त्यश्वरथपादातम् elephants, horses, chariots and infantry, 	दिव्यरूपम् of celestial beauty, स्वलङ्कृतम् welldecorated, अनुत्तमम् excellent, दासीदासम् male and female servants, तासाम् for them, ददौ gave.
1::74::5::परमसंहृष्ट: immensely pleased, हिरण्यस्य golden, सुवर्णस्य of fine glow, मुक्तानाम् pearls', विद्रुमस्य corals, अनुत्तमम् excellent, कन्याधनम् ornaments to his daughters, ददौ gave.  
1::74::6::मिथिलेश्वर: lord of Mithila, राजा king Janaka, बहु धनं plenty of wealth, दत्त्वा having given, पार्थिवम् king Dasaratha, समनुज्ञाप्य after making him give consent to Janaka to go back, स्वनिलयम् own residence, मिथिलाम् Mithila, प्रविवेश entered. 
1::74::7::अयोध्याधिपति: lord of Ayodhya, राजापि king Dasaratha also, महात्मभि: with illustrious, पुत्रै: सह along with his sons, सर्वान् all, ऋषीन् sages, पुरस्कृत्य placing him in the forefront, सबलानुग: followed by his army and followers, जगाम went.
1::74::8::सर्षिसङ्घम् with hosts of sages, सराघवम् with Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna, नरव्याघ्रम् tiger among men, तम् that, Dasaratha, ततस्तत: here and there, घोरा: frightening, पक्षिण: birds, वाच: disagreeable sounds, व्याहरन्ति स्म uttered.
1::74::9::भौमा: those relating to earth, सर्वे all, मृगा: beasts, प्रदक्षिणम् moving to the right, गच्छन्ति  went away, तान् them, दृष्ट्वा having seen, राजशार्दूल: best among men, Dasaratha, वसिष्ठम् Vasishta, पर्यपृच्छत enquired.
1::74::10::घोरा: freightening, पक्षिण: birds, असौम्या: are disagreeable, मृगाश्चापि deers also, प्रदक्षिणा: on to their right, हृदयोत्कम्पि trembling my heart, इदम् this, किम् what, मम my, मन: mind, विषीदति depressed of spirits.
1::74::11::महानृषि: that great rishi Vasishta, राज्ञ: दशरथस्य king Dasarath's, एतत् these, वाक्यम् words, श्रुत्वा having listened, मधुराम् in gentle accents, वाणीम् words, उवाच spoke, अस्य for this, यत् which, फलम् consequence, श्रूयताम् may be heard. 
1::74::12::पक्षिमुखात् from the mouth of these birds, च्युतम् released (foretells), दिव्यम् of celestial nature, उपस्थितम् befallen, घोरम् dreadful, भयम् fear, एते these, मृगा: beasts, प्रशमयन्ति restoring peace, अयम् this, सन्ताप: grief, त्यज्यताम् may be abandoned.
1::74::13::तेषां when they, संवदताम् were conversing, तत्र there, पृथिवीम् the earth, कम्पयन् shaking, शुभान् beautiful, द्रुमान् trees, पातयन् felling, वायु: wind, प्रादुर्बभूव ह arose. 
1::74::14::सूर्य: Sun, तमसा with darkness, संवृत: covered, सर्वा: all, दिश: cardinal quarters, न प्रबभु: did not shine, तत् that, सर्वम् all, बलम् army, भस्मना with ashes, आवृतं covered with, संमूढमिव as if fainted.
1::74::15::तदा then, वसिष्ठश्च Vasishta, अन्ये other, ऋषयश्च saints, ससुत: with his sons, राजा king Dasaratha, ससंज्ञा: इव as if having consciousness, (तत्र)आसन् remained, अन्यत् others, सर्वम् entire, विचेतनम् lost their consciousness.
1::74::16::तस्मिन् In that, घोरे fearful, तमसि darkness, भस्मच्छन्नेव looking as if covered with ashes, सा चमू: that army, भीमसङ्काशम् looking dreadful, जटामण्डलधारिणम् wearing a crown of  matted hair, राजराजविमर्दिनम् decimated the king of kings, कैलासमिव like Kailasa Mountain, दुर्धर्षम् inaccessible, कालाग्निमिव like the fire at the time of dissolution, दुस्सहम् difficult to endure, तेजोभि: with energy, ज्वलन्तमिव as if blazing, पृथग्जनै: by ordinary people, दुर्निरीक्षम् incapable of being gazed upon, परशुम् axe, स्कन्धे on his shoulder, आसज्य hanging, विद्युद्गणोपमम् resembling group of lightenings, धनु: bow, शरमुख्यम्  principal arrow, प्रगृह्य grasping, त्रिपुरघ्नम् slayer of Tripura, शिवं यथा like Siva, तम् that, भार्गवम् descendent of Bhrugu, जामदग्नयम् son of Jamadagni, ददर्श beheld.
1::74::17::भीमसङ्काशम् fearful appearance, ज्वलन्तम् like flaming, पावकम् इव like fire, तम् him, दृष्ट्वा having seen, जपहोमपरायणा: engaged in reciting mantras and oblations to the fire, विप्रा: brahmanas, वसिष्ठप्रमुखा: Vasishta and others, सर्वे मुनय: all saints, सङ्गता: having assembled, अथो afterwards, मिथ: mutually, सञ्जजल्पु: whispered.
1::74::18::पितृवधामर्षी enraged at the slaughter of his father, क्षत्रम् kshatriya race, नोत्सादयिष्यतिकच्चित् is he not intent upon exterminating, पूर्वम् formerly, क्षत्रवधम् slaughter of kshatriyas, कृत्वा having made, गतमन्यु: freed from anger, गतज्वर: freed from grief, भूय: again, क्षत्रस्य of kshatriya race, उत्सादनम् annihilation, अस्य for him, न चिकीर्षितं खलु is not desirous of doing it indeed.
1::74::19::ऋषय: saints, एवम् thus, उक्त्वा having talked amongst themselves, अर्घ्यम् the arghya, आदाय taking, भीमदर्शनम् dreadful appearance, भार्गवम् son of Bhargava, राम राम इति Rama, Rama saying so, मधुरम् वच: soothing words, अब्रुवन् spoke.
1::74::20::प्रतापवान् valiant, जामदग्न्य: son of Jamadagni, राम: Parasurama, ऋषिदत्ताम् offered by saints, ताम् पूजाम् that homage, प्रतिगृह्य having accpted, दाशरथिं रामम् Rama, son of Dasaratha, अभ्यभाषत spoke.
