1::1::1::तपस्वी ascetic, वाल्मीकि: Valmiki, तप: स्वाध्यायनिरतम् highly delighted in the practice of religious austerities and study of vedas, वाग्विदां वरम् eloquent among the knowledgeable, मुनिपुङ्गवम् preeminent among sages, नारदम् Narada, परिपप्रच्छ enquired.
1::1::2::अस्मिन् लोके in this world, साम्प्रतम् now, गुणवान् endowed with excellent qualities, क: नु who indeed, वीर्यवांश्च with  prowess, धर्मज्ञ: च knower of righteousness, कृतज्ञ: च grateful (who remembers even little help done by others), सत्यवाक्य: truthful in his statements, दृढव्रत: firm in his vows (till such time he achieves the results), क: who?
1::1::3::क: who?, चारित्रेण with good conduct, युक्त: is endowed, क: who?, सर्वभूतेषु for all living beings, हित: benefactor, क: who?, विद्वान् learned man (knower of everything which is to be known), क: who?, समर्थ: च competent (capable of doing things which cannot be done by others), क: who? एकप्रियदर्शन: च solely delightful in  appearance  to everyone, 
1::1::4::आत्मवान् selfrestrained, क: who?, जितक्रोध: one who has conquered anger, द्युतिमान् one who is endowed with splendour, अनसूयक: one who is free from envy (envy depicting one's merits as weak points), क: who?, जातरोषस्य excited to wrath, कस्य to whom, संयुगे in the battle, देवा: च celestial beings, devatas, बिभ्यति are afraid of.
1::1::5::एतत् this, अहम् I, श्रोतुम् to listen, इच्छामि am desirous, मे my, कौतूहलम् curiosity, परं हि is great, महर्षे O Maharshi, त्वम् you, एवंविधम् of such (virtues), नरम् man, ज्ञातुम् to know, समर्थ: असि are competent.
1::1::6::त्रिलोकज्ञ: cognizant of three worlds, नारद: Narada, वाल्मीके: Valmiki's, एतत् वच: these words, श्रुत्वा च having heard, श्रूयताम् इति Listen to me, चामन्त्त्र्य च having invited, प्रहृष्ट: was delighted, वाक्यम् words, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::1::7::मुने OSage Valmiki, बहव: many, दुर्लभा: च एव rare indeed are the ordinary people endowed with such qualities, ये गुणा: those qualities, त्वया by you, कीर्तिता: described, तै: with those qualities, युक्त: endowed with, नर: man, श्रूयताम् listen, अहम् I, बुद्ध्वा having ascertained, वक्ष्यामि shall tell you.
1::1::8::इक्ष्वाकुवंशप्रभव: born in the race of king Ikshvaku, राम: नाम known as Rama (one who delights others), जनै: by people, श्रुत: is heard, नियतात्मा steady natured (meaning thereby immutable form), महावीर्य: incomprehensible prowess, द्युतिमान् selfeffulgent, धृतिमान् selfcommanding, वशी subjecting the senses (subjecting the entire world under his control).
1::1::9::बुद्धिमान् great intellectual, नीतिमान् learned in ethical (statecraft) philosophy, वाग्मी proficient in speeches, श्रीमान् possessing vast auspiciousness, शत्रुनिबर्हण: destroyer of foes (sins), विपुलांस: broad shouldered, महाबाहु: strongarmed, कम्बुग्रीव: possessing conchshaped neck, महाहनु: having prominent and strong cheeks.
1::1::10::महोरस्क: having broad chest, महेष्वासः armed with a great bow (meaning thereby having strong body to carry a bow), गूढजत्रुः has fleshy collar bones, अरिन्दमः is destroyer of foes (sins), आजानुबाहु: has arms extending upto knees, सुशिराः head with noble qualities, सुललाटः has a large and beautiful forehead, सुविक्रमः is endowed with mighty prowess.
1::1::11::समः neither too tall nor too short, समविभक्ताङ्ग: has wellproportioned limbs, स्निग्धवर्णः has shining complexion, प्रतापवान् is mighty and powerful, पीनवक्षा: strong welldeveloped chest, विशालाक्षः has expansive eyes, लक्ष्मीवान् lustrous body, शुभलक्षणः has auspicious qualities (according to science of palmistry). 
1::1::12::धर्मज्ञ: knower of duties (of protecting those who take refuge in him) of life, सत्यसन्ध: firm in his vows, प्रजानाम् for his subjects, हिते doing good, रतः intent on, यशस्वी renowned, ज्ञानसम्पन्नः omniscient, शुचिः pure and devout, वश्यः obedient to elders (or accessible to those who are dependent on him), समाधिमान् meditating on the means of protecting those who took refuge in him. 
1::1::13::प्रजापतिसमः equal to Brahma, श्रीमान् surpassed the entire world in auspiciousness, धाता sustainer of this entire world, रिपुनिषूदनः destroyer of enemies, रक्षिता protector, जीवलोकस्य of all living beings,  धर्मस्य of  code of morals,  परिरक्षिता protector.  
1::1::14::स्वस्य of his own, धर्मस्य duties of a king, रक्षिता protector, स्वजनस्य च of his own subjects, रक्षिता protector, वेदवेदाङ्गतत्त्वज्ञ: knowledgeable in the true nature of vedas and vedangas, धनुर्वेदे च in military science, one of the upavedas (a great archer), निष्ठित: accomplished.
1::1::15::सर्वशास्त्रार्थतत्त्वज्ञ: knower of the true meaning of all scriptures, स्मृतिमान् has infalliable retentive memory, प्रतिभानवान् is talented (possessing brightness of conception), सर्वलोकप्रियः is beloved of all people, साधु: welldisposed and courteous (even towards those who have done harm), अदीनात्मा unperturbed mind (even in times of extreme grief), विचक्षणः has dicrimination (is circumspect in doing right things in right time).
1::1::16::समुद्रः sea, सिन्धुभिः the rivers, इव like, सद्भिः good persons, सर्वदा ever, अभिगतः is approachable, आर्यः man of virtue, सर्वसमः च एव having equitable dispostition towards all, सदैकप्रियदर्शनः always has delightful countenance.
1::1::17::कौसल्यानन्दवर्धन: he, who is enhancing the joys of Kausalya, स: च he also, सर्वगुणोपेत:  endowed with all virtues, गाम्भीर्ये in depth of his thoughts, समुद्र: इव like a sea, धैर्येण in fortitude, हिमवान् इव like Himavat mountain.
1::1::18::वीर्ये In prowess, विष्णुना सदृश: similar to visnu, सोमवत् in appearance as is full Moon, प्रियदर्शन: pleasing to the sight, क्रोधे in anger, कालाग्निसदृश: like destructive fire at the end of the world, क्षमया in patience, पृथिवीसम: equal to earth, त्यागे in charity, धनदेन सम: like Kubera, सत्ये in truth, अपर: धर्म: इव like another god of justice.
1::1::19::महीपति: दशरथ: lord of earth, Dasaratha, एवं गुणसम्पन्नम् him who was possessing all such good qualities, सत्यपराक्रमम् him who had not a vain prowess, श्रेष्ठगुणै: with excellent virtues, युक्तम् endowed with, प्रियम् beloved, प्रकृतीनाम् for his subjects, हितै: with good deeds, युक्तम् endowed with, ज्येष्ठम् eldest, सुतम् son, तं रामम् Sri Rama, प्रकृतिप्रियकाम्यया ever intent on the welfare of the people, प्रीत्या with affection, यौवराज्येन heirapparent, संयोक्तुम् to install, ऐच्छत् wished.
1::1::20::अथ thereafter, तस्य Rama's, अभिषेकसम्भारान् preparations for the installation, दृष्ट्वा having seen, पूर्वम् previously, दत्तवरा was promised with boons, भार्या wife, देवी queen, कैकयी Kaikeyi, रामस्य Rama's, विवासनम् exile, भरतस्य of Bharata, अभिषेचनम्  enthronement, वरम् boon, एनम् अयाचत begged of Dasaratha. 
1::1::21::स: दशरथ: Dasaratha, सत्यवचनात् due to being truthful to his word, धर्मपाशेन by the bond of duty, संयत: restrained, प्रियं सुतम् beloved son, रामम् Rama, विवासयामास sent (to the forest). 
1::1::22::वीर: स: that mighty  Sri Rama, कैकेय्या: Kaikeyi's, प्रियकारणात् with a view to gratify, पितु: father's, वचननिर्देशात् by the word of command, प्रतिज्ञाम् his promise, अनुपालयन् while obeying, वनम् forest,  जगाम went.
1::1::23:: विनयसम्पन्न: endowed with modesty, भ्रातु: for brother Rama, दयित: beloved, प्रिय: भ्राता brother with natural affection,  सुमित्रानन्दवर्धन: one who enhances the joy of Sumitra, लक्ष्मण: Lakshmana, सौभ्रात्रम् affectionate brotherhood, अनुदर्शयन् showing, व्रजन्तम् departing to the forest, तं भ्रातरम् his brother Rama, स्नेहात् out of affection, अनुजगाम ह followed.     
1::1::24::रामस्य for Rama, दयिता beloved, भार्या wife, प्राणसमा equal to his vital breath, नित्यम् always, हिता doing fit and proper acts beneficial to him, जनकस्य king Janaka's, कुले in the  race, जाता born, निर्मिता created, देवमायेव like Maya Mohini, the assumed form of visnuhnu,  सर्वलक्षणसम्पन्ना endowed with all auspicious characteristics, नारीणाम् among women, उत्तमा the foremost, वधू: daughterinlaw (of Dasaratha), सीतापि Sita also, रोहिणी Rohini, (one of the several daughters of Daksha and consort of moon) शशिनम् यथा like moon, रामम् Rama, अनुगता followed.
1::1::25::पौरै: by citizens, पित्रा दशरथेन च by his father Dasaratha also, दूरम् for a long distance, अनुगत: followed, धर्मात्मा राम: Rama of righteous nature (the protector of those who take refuge in him), गङ्गाकूले on the bank of river Ganga, शृङ्गिबेरपुरे at Shrungiberapura, निषादाधिपतिम् the king of Nishadas, प्रियम् endeared to him, गुहम् Guha, आसाद्य having approached, गुहेन along with Guha, लक्ष्मणेन by Lakshmana, सीतया च and by Sita, सहित: accompanied सूतम् charioteer Sumantra, व्यसर्जयत् sent back.
1::1::26::ते they, वनेन from one forest, वनम् to another forest, गत्वा having gone, बहूदका: नदी: deep and broad rivers with plenty of waters, तीर्त्वा having crossed, भरद्वाजस्य sage Bharadwaja's, शासनात् order, चित्रकूटम् Chitrakuta mountain, अनुप्राप्य having reached, रम्यम् delightful, आवसथम् abode (a hut made of leaves), कृत्वा having constructed, ते they (having enjoyed such comforts), त्रय: three, तत्र वने in the forest located in Chitrakuta mountain, रममाणा: enjoying, देवगन्धर्वसङ्काशा: resembling devas and gandharvas, सुखम् happily, न्यवसन् dwelt.
1::1::27::ते they, वनेन from one forest, वनम् to another forest, गत्वा having gone, बहूदका: नदी: deep and broad rivers with plenty of waters, तीर्त्वा having crossed, भरद्वाजस्य sage Bharadwaja's, शासनात् order, चित्रकूटम् Chitrakuta mountain, अनुप्राप्य having reached,  रम्यम् delightful, आवसथम् abode (a hut made of leaves), कृत्वा having constructed, ते they (having enjoyed such comforts), त्रय: three, तत्र वने in the forest located in Chitrakuta mountain, रममाणा: enjoying, देवगन्धर्वसङ्काशा: resembling devas and gandharvas, सुखम् happily, न्यवसन् dwelt.
1::1::28::तथा in that way, रामे when Rama, चित्रकूटम् गते had set out to Chitrakuta, पुत्रशोकातुर: stricken by the grief over the separation from his son, राजा दशरथ: king Dasaratha, सुतम् about his son, विलपन् wailing, स्वर्गम् heavens, जगाम went.    
1::1::29::तस्मिन् when he (Dasaratha), मृते had died, वसिष्ठप्रमुखै: द्विजै: with Vasishta and other brahmins, राज्याय to rule the kingdom, नियुज्यमान: had been ordered, महाबल: mighty, भरत: तु Bharata, राज्यम् kingdom, नैच्छत् did not desire to rule .
1::1::30::वीर: The brave person who had conquered envy and hatred, रामपादप्रसादक: in order to propitiate Rama's feet, स he, वनं forest, जगाम went.
1::1::31::आर्यभावपुरस्कृत: worshipped with reverence, सुमहात्मानम् highly respectable, सत्यपराक्रमम्  truthful chivalry, गत्वा having reached, रामम् Rama, भ्रातरं रामम् brother Rama, अयाचत् implored.धर्मज्ञ: knower of righteousness, त्वमेव you alone, राजा इति should be the king, रामम् addressing Rama, वच: words, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::1::32::रामोऽपि eventhough he delights everybody, परमोदारोऽपि eventhough exceedingly generous (in fulfilling the desires like absorption in divinity etc, of those who take refuge in him), सुमुखोऽपि eventhough having cheerful countenance (when somebody approaches him for favours), राम Rama, सुमहायशा: greatly renowned (because of dispensing charities), महाबल: highly capable (in fulfilling the desires of others), पितु: father's, आदेशात् by command, राज्यम् kingdom, नैच्छत् refused to accept.
1::1::33::भरताग्रज: Bharata's elder brother, Rama, राज्याय to rule the kingdom, अस्य to him, पादुके his own sandals, न्यासम् in deposit, as symbol of authority, दत्वा having given, तत: thereafter, पुन:पुन: repeatedly, भरतम् Bharata, निवर्तयामास persuaded him to return to the capital.
1::1::34::स: Bharata, कामम् desire, अनवाप्यैव without fulfilling only, रामपादौ sandals of Rama, उपस्पृशन् touching with reverence, रामागमनकाङ्क्षया eagerly awaiting the return of Rama, नन्दिग्रामे in Nandigrama, राज्यम् अकरोत् ruled the kingdom.
1::1::35::भरते when Bharata, गते तु had gone, श्रीमान् one possessing brightness, सत्यसन्ध: steadfast in his vows, जितेन्द्रिय: conquered the  senses, राम: तु Rama, नागरस्य जनस्य च of citydwelling citizens', पुन: again, तत्र in that Chitrakuta mountain, आगमनम् arrival, आलक्ष्य perceiving, एकाग्र: with undivided concentration of mind and resoluteness (to fulfill the promise given to his father), दण्डकान् Dandaka forest, प्रविवेश ह entered.   
1::1::36::राजीवलोचनः lotuseyed, रामः Rama, महारण्यम् dreary forest (Dandakaranya) प्रविश्य तु having entered, विराधम् Viradha, राक्षसम् Rakshasa, हत्वा after slaying, शरभङ्गम् sage Sarabhanga, सुतीक्ष्णं च also sage Sutikshna, अगस्त्यं च sage Agastya, तथा and, अगस्त्यभ्रातरं च brother of sage Agastya, ददर्श ह saw.
1::1::37::अगस्त्यवचनात् च एव as directed by sage Agastya, ऐन्द्रम् given by Indra, शरासनम् bow, खड्गं च a sword, अक्षयसायकौ inexhaustible arrows, तूणी च and quivers, परमप्रीतः extremely delighted, जग्राह received. 
1::1::38::तस्य रामस्य when Rama, वने in that forest (in the hermitage of sage Sarabhanga), वसत: was dwelling, सर्वे ऋषय: all the ascetics, वनचरैः सह along with those inhabiting the forest, असुररक्षसाम् asuras and rakshasas (seizing upon the lives), वधाय for destruction, अभ्यागमन् approached.
1::1::39::स: Rama, राक्षसानाम् for rakshsas (abode of), वने in that forest, तेषां to those asetics, तथा that prayer, प्रतिशुश्राव assented, ऋषीणाम् of the ascetics, अग्निकल्पानाम् in lustre resembling flaming fire, दण्डकारण्यवासिनाम् inhabitants of Dandakaranya, संयति in the battle, रक्षसाम् of rakshasas, वधश्च slaying also, रामेण by Rama, प्रतिज्ञातः was promised.  
1::1::40::तत्रैव वसता while living in that place itself, तेन by Rama, जनस्थाननिवासिनी resident of  Janasthana area (of Dandakaranya), कामरूपिणी capable of assuming any form at will, राक्षसी शूर्पणखा female demon Surpanakha, विरूपिता was deformed.
1::1::41::ततः thereafter, शूर्पणखावाक्यात् (instigated) by the words of Surpanakha, उद्युक्तान् ready for a battle, सर्वराक्षसान् all the rakshasas, खरम् एव Khara only, त्रिशिरसं च Trisira also, दूषणम् Dushana, राक्षसं च एव rakshasa also, तेषाम् their, पदानुगान् च एव followers also, राम: Rama, वने in the forest, निजघान killed.
1::1::42::तस्मिन् वने in that forest, निवसता by Rama who was living, जनस्थाननिवासिनाम् of the inhabitants of Janasthana, रक्षसाम् of rakshasas, चतुर्दशसहस्राणि fourteen thousand of them,  निहतानि आसन् were killed.
1::1::43::तत: thereafter, रावणः Ravana, ज्ञातिवधम् slaughter of fellow rakshasas, श्रुत्वा having heard, क्रोधमूर्छितः became violent with anger, मारीचं नाम named Maricha, राक्षसम् rakshasa, सहायम् help, वरयामास sought for. 
1::1::44::रावण O Ravana, बलवता with that mighty and powerful (because of slaying of Khara etc. rakshasas), तेन with that Rama, विरोध: hostilities, ते to you, न क्षम: is not proper in this way, मारीचेन by Maricha, सुबहुश: well in many ways, वार्यमाणः dissuaded, स: रावण: that Ravana. 
1::1::45::रावणः Ravana, कालचोदितः incited by destiny, तद्वाक्यम् those words, अनादृत्य तु disregarding, सहमारीचः followed by Maricha, तस्य आश्रमपदम् towards his hermitage, तदा then, जगाम went. 
1::1::46::मायाविना by the deceitful, तेन by him (Maricha), नृपात्मजौ princes (Rama and Lakshmana), दूरम् far away, अपवाह्य drawing them away, जटायुषम् Jatayu, गृध्रम् vulture, हत्वा having killed, रामस्य Rama's, भार्याम् wife, Sita, जहार carried away.
1::1::47::राघव: Rama, निहतम् struck down, गृध्रम् eagle Jatayu, दृष्ट्वा having seen, मैथिलीम् the princess of Mithila, Sita, हृताम् abducted, श्रुत्वा च having heard (from Jatayu), शोकसन्तप्त: distressed with grief, आकुलेन्द्रियः with obscured senses, विललाप bewailed.
1::1::48::तेनैव शोकेन pervaded by that sorrow, तत: then, गृध्रं जटायुषम् vulture Jatayu, दग्ध्वा having  consigned to flames, वने in the forest, सीताम् Sita, मार्गमाण: wandering in search of, रूपेण in form, विकृतम् deformed, घोरदर्शनम् dreadful appearance, कबन्धन्नाम named Kabandha, राक्षसम् rakshasa, सन्ददर्श ह beheld.
1::1::49::महाबाहु: mightyarmed Rama, तम् that Kabandha, निहत्य having killed, ददाह consigned him to flames, स: he (his soul), स्वर्गतश्च ascended heaven, स च Kabandha (while leaving for heavens), राघव O Raghava,  धर्मचारिणीम् performing religious duties, धर्मनिपुणाम् proficient in practising austerities duties, श्रमणीम् female ascetic, शबरीम् belonging to Sabara community, अभिगच्छ visit her, अस्य to Rama, इति कथयामास informed.
1::1::50::महातेजा: possessing great splendour, शत्रुसूदन: destroyer of enemies, स: he, शबरीम् towards Sabari, अभ्यगच्छत् had gone, दशरथात्मज: son of Dasaratha, राम: Rama, शबर्या by Sabari, सम्यक् duly, पूजित: worshipped.
1::1::51::पम्पातीरे on the bank of Pampa, वानरेण with a monkey, हनुमता named Hanuman, सङ्गत: ह was united, हनुमद्वचनात् on the advice of Hanuman, सुग्रीवेण चैव by Sugriva also, समागत: was united.
1::1::52::महाबल: mighty and powerful, राम: Rama, आदित: right from the beginning, तत् सर्वम् all that story, विशेषत: particularly, सीतायाश्च Sita's, यथावृत्तं as it happened (abduction), सुग्रीवाय च to Sugriva, also to Hanuman, शंसत् related.  
1::1::53::वानर: monkey, सुग्रीव: Sugriva, रामस्य Rama's, तत् सर्वम् all that story, श्रुत्वा having heard, प्रीत: pleased, अग्निसाक्षिकं चैव witnessed by Agni, god of fire, रामेण with Rama, सख्यं चकार, made a pact of friendship.   
1::1::54::तत: thereafter, दु:खितेन by him who was filled with sorrow, वानरराजेन by the king of monkeys, Sugriva, वैरानुकथनं प्रति his story about hostilities (with Vali), रामाय to Rama, सर्वम् entirely, प्रणयात् out of friendship, आवेदितम् was communicated.  
1::1::55::तदा then, रामेण by Rama, वालिवधं प्रति about slaying of Vali, प्रतिज्ञातम् vowed, तत्र there, वानर: Sugriva, वालिन: Vali's, बलम् च prowess, कथयामास described.
1::1::56::सुग्रीवश्च Sugriva also, राघवे in Rama's, वीर्येण prowess, नित्यम् always, शङ्कित: आसीत् had a doubt, सुग्रीव: Sugriva, राघवप्रत्ययार्थम् with a view to get convinced about Rama, दुन्दुभे: rakshasa named Dundubhi, महापर्वतसन्निभम् resembling a high mountain, उत्तमं कायम्  huge  body, दर्शयामास showed.
1::1::57::महाबल: one endowed with strength, महाबाहु: strongarmed (Rama), अस्थि skeleton, प्रेक्ष्य having looked, उत्स्मयित्वा smiling at a depth for a while, पादाङ्गुष्ठेन with the great toe of the foot, सम्पूर्णं completely, दशयोजनम् to a distance of ten yojanas (eighty miles), चिक्षेप kicked off.
1::1::58::तथा then, पुनश्च again, प्रत्ययम् confidence, जनयन् creating, एकेन with one, महेषुणा mighty shaft, सप्त सालान् seven palmyra trees, गिरिम् a mountain, रसातलं चैव Rasatala (one of  the seven lower worlds under the earth), बिभेद penetrated.
1::1::59::तत: thereafter, तेन by that act, प्रीतमना: well pleased, स महाकपि: that mighty monkey Sugriva, विश्वस्त: च was convinced, रामसहित: together with Rama, तदा then, गुहाम् a cave,  किष्किन्धाम् city of Kishkindha, जगाम approached.
1::1::60::तत: then, हरिवर: best of monkeys, हेमपिङ्गल: yellowish hued like gold, सुग्रीव: Sugriva, अगर्जत् roared, तेन महता with great, नादेन voice, हरीश्वर: lord of monkeys (Vali), निर्जगाम came out.
1::1::61::तदा then, ताराम् Tara (Vali's wife), अनुमान्य having convinced, सुग्रीवेण Sugriva, समागत: joined (entered into a combat), राघव: Raghava, तत्र there, एनम् him, एकेन with one, शरेण च single shaft, निजघान killed.
1::1::62::राघव: Rama, सुग्रीववचनात् in compliance with the words of Sugriva, वालिनम् Vali, आहवे in the battle, हत्वा having killed, तत: thereafter, तद्राज्ये in that kingdom of Vali, सुग्रीवमेव Sugriva itself, प्रत्यपादयत् proposed (installed).
1::1::63::स: वानरर्षभ: च the best of monkeys, Sugriva, जनकात्मजाम् Janaka's daughter, Sita, दिदृक्षु: desirous of seeing, सर्वान् all, वानरान् monkey forces, समानीय after summoning, दिश: in various directions, प्रस्थापयामास despatched.   
1::1::64::तत: thereafter, बली हनुमान् mighty Hanuman, सम्पाते: Sampathi's, गृध्रस्य vulture's, वचनात् in accordance with suggestion, शतयोजनविस्तीर्णम् extending over a hundred yojanas (about 800 miles), लवणार्णवम् saltsea, पुप्लुवे leapt over.
1::1::65::रावणपालिताम् ruled by Ravana, लङ्काम् पुरीम् city of Lanka, समासाद्य having reached, तत्र there, अशोकवनिकाम् गताम् who had gone to Ashoka garden, ध्यायन्तीम् contemplating (on Rama), सीताम् Sita, ददर्श found.  
1::1::66::अभिज्ञानम् as token of recognition (Rama's ring), निवेदयित्वा having presented, प्रवृत्तिं च the entire account, निवेद्य च having related, वैदेहीम् daughter of the king of Videha with its capital at Mithila, Sita, समाश्वास्य having consoled, तोरणम् outer gate of the garden, मर्दयामास crushed.
1::1::67::पञ्च सेनाग्रगान् five commanders, सप्त मन्त्रिसुतानपि seven sons of counsellors, हत्वा having killed, शूरम् valiant, अक्षं च Akshaya Kumara, son of Ravana, निष्पिष्य having stamped, ग्रहणम् समुपागमत् got caught, to be taken as captive.
1::1::68::वीर: mighty warrior, महाकपि: great monkey, Hanuman, पैतामहात् by Brahma's, वरात् boon, आत्मानम् his own self, अस्त्रेण by the weapon (given by Brahma), उन्मुक्तम् released, ज्ञात्वा coming to know, यदृच्छया casually (in the expectation of his another objective of seeing Ravana), यन्त्रिण: restrained by ropes, तान् राक्षसान् those rakshasas, मर्षयन् while enduring, तत: after completion of that act, मैथिलीम् सीतां ऋते except Sita (Mythili), लङ्कां पुरीम् the city of Lanka, दग्ध्वा having burnt, रामाय for Rama, प्रियम् welcome tidings, आख्यातुम् to deliver, पुन: आयात् returned again. 
1::1::69::अमेयात्मा possessing boundless intellect, स: he (Hanuman), महात्मानम् highly courageous, रामम् Rama, अधिगम्य having reached, प्रदक्षिणम् circumambulation, कृत्वा having made, दृष्टा seen, सीता Sita, इति in this manner, तत्त्वत: truthfully, न्यवेदयत् informed. 
1::1::70::तत: thereafter, सुग्रीवसहित: together with Sugriva, महोदधे: तीरम् shore of mighty ocean, गत्वा having reached, आदित्यसन्निभै: resembling sharp and hot rays of sun, शरै: with shafts, समुद्रम् Samudra, lord of the waters, क्षोभयामास agitated. 
1::1::71::सरितां पति: lord of rivers, समुद्र: Samudra, आत्मानम् in his own form, दर्शयामास appeared (to Rama), समुद्रवचनात् च एव on the advice of Samudra , नलम् through Nala, सेतुम् a bridge, अकारयत् got it built.
1::1::72::राम: Rama, तेन through that bridge, लङ्कापुरीं city of Lanka, गत्वा having reached, आहवे in the battle, रावणम् Ravana, हत्वा after slaying, सीताम् Sita, प्राप्य having recovered, अनु thereafter, पराम् great, व्रीडाम् embarassment, उपागमत् experienced (pursuant to her stay in others' house for a long time).
1::1::73::तत: for that reason, राम: Rama, जनसंसदि in the assembly of men, ताम् about Sita, परुषम् harsh words, उवाच spoke, सती chaste, सा सीता Sita, अमृष्यमाणा incapable of enduring those words, ज्वलनं विवेश entered flaming fire.
1::1::74::तत: thereafter, अग्निवचनात् because of the testimony of firegod, सीताम् Sita, विगतकल्मषाम् sinless, ज्ञात्वा having known, राम: Rama, सम्प्रहृष्ट: exceedingly pleased, सर्वदैवतै: by all gods, पूजित: was adored,  बभौ shone.
1::1::75::महात्मन: of highly courageous, राघवस्य Rama's, तेन महता कर्मणा by that great act, सचराचरम् all the animate and inanimate beings, सदेवर्षिगणम् including  groups of gods and sages, त्रैलोक्यम् in three worlds, तुष्टम् wellpleased. 
1::1::76::राम: Rama, विभीषणम् Vibhisana, राक्षसेन्द्रम् king of rakshasas, लङ्कायाम् in the city of Lanka, अभिषिच्य coronated, तदा then, कृतकृत्य: having accomplished his objective, विज्वर: free from distress, प्रमुमोद ह was exceedingly rejoiced.
1::1::77::राम: Rama, देवताभ्य: from devatas, वरम् boon, प्राप्य having obtained, वानरान् monkeys fallen in the battle, समुत्थाप्य च revived, सुहृद्वृत: accompanied by friends, पुष्पकेण by  Pushpaka, the aerial car, अयोध्याम् Ayodhya, प्रस्थित: set out.
1::1::78::सत्यपराक्रम: steadfast in truth, राम: delightful to everybody, भरद्वाजाश्रमम् hermitage of Bharadwaja, गत्वा having gone, भरतस्यान्तिकम् to the presence of Bharata, हनूमन्तम् Hanuman, राम: Rama, व्यसर्जयत् despatched.
1::1::79::पुन: again, सुग्रीवसहित: accompanied by Sugriva, स: Rama, आख्यायिकाम् recalling earlier incidents, जल्पन् conversing with each other, तदा then, तत् पुष्पकं समारुह्य mounting on that Pushpaka, नन्दिग्रामम् to Nandigrama,  ययौ departed.
1::1::80::अनघ: sinless, राम: Rama, नन्दिग्रामे in Nandigrama, भ्रातृभि: सहित: along with his brothers, जटाम् matted lock, हित्वा shedding, सीताम् Sita, अनुप्राप्य having regained, राज्यम् kingdom, पुन: again, अवाप्तवान् got (back).
1::1::81::लोक: entire world, प्रहृष्टमुदित: rejoiced with happiness, तुष्ट: contended (because of fulfillment of their desire), पुष्ट: grown in strength because of happiness,  सुधार्मिक: with righteousness, निरामय: without sufferings or agonies, अरोग: without diseases,  दुर्भिक्षभयवर्जित: च and without fear of  famine. 
1::1::82::पुरुषा: men, क्वचित् any where, किञ्चित् even little, पुत्रमरणम् death of ones's own son, न द्रक्ष्यन्ति will not see, नार्यश्च women, अविधवा: will not be widowed, नित्यम् always, पतिव्रता: भविष्यन्ति will be devoted to their husbands.
1::1::83::तत्र in that kingdom of Rama, अग्निजं भयम् fear due to fire, किञ्चित् न not even little, जन्तव: creatures, अप्सु in water, न मज्जन्ति will not be drowned, वातजं भयम् danger due to wind, किञ्चित् न not even little, तथा and, ज्वरकृतम् अपि न also no fear from fever, न क्षुद्भयम् अपि no fear from hunger, तथा and, तस्करभयं न no fear from thieves.   
1::1::84::नगराणि च cities, राष्ट्राणि च villages, धनधान्ययुतानि rich in food grains and wealth, यथा कृतयुगे as in kritayuga, तथा in the same way, सर्वे all, नित्यम् ever,  प्रमुदिता: were happy.
1::1::85::महायशा: highly renowned, अश्वमेधशतै: by hundreds of Aswamedha sacrifices, तथा and  बहुसुवर्णकै: Bahusuvarnaka sacrifices (where gold is given as charity on large scale),  इष्ट्वा satisfying the gods, गवाम् cows, कोट्ययुतम् hundreds of thousands, दत्वा having bestowed, असंख्येयम् countless, धनम् wealth, ब्राह्मणेभ्य: for brahmins, दत्वा having bestowed, ब्रह्मलोकं प्रयास्यति will proceed to Brahmaloka.
1::1::86::राघव: Rama, अस्मिन् लोके in this world, शतगुणान् hundred times, राजवंशान् royal dynasties, स्थापयिष्यति will establish, चातुर्वर्ण्यम् four castes, स्वे स्वे in their respective, धर्मे duties, नियोक्ष्यति will employ.
1::1::87::राम: Rama, दशवर्षसहस्राणि for ten thousand years, दशवर्षशतानि च ten hundred years, राज्यम् kingdom, उपासित्वा reigning, ब्रह्मलोकम् Brahmaloka, प्रयास्यति will attain.  
1::1::88::इदं रामचरितम् this story of Rama, पवित्रम् sacred, पापघ्नम् destroyer of sins, पुण्यम् auspicious, वेदै: by vedas, सम्मितं च equal to, य: who, पठेत् reads, सर्वपापै: from all sins, प्रमुच्यते will be released.     
1::1::89::एतद् रामायणम् this Ramayana, आख्यानम् true meaning, आयुष्यम् longevity, पठन् reading, नर: men, सपुत्रपौत्र: with sons and grandsons, सगण: with servants and relations, प्रेत्य after death, स्वर्गे in heavens, महीयते worshipped.
1::1::90::पठन् जन: People by  reading this, द्विज: स्यात् if he is a brahmin, वागृषभत्वम् proficient in the eighteen branches of learning, ईयात् attains, क्षत्रिय: kshatriya, भूमिपतित्वम् lordship over landed possessions, ईयात् gets, वणिग्जनः vaisya, पण्यफलत्वम् fruits of his merit, ईयात् gets, जनश्च men, शूद्रोऽपि sudra also, महत्वम् greatness, ईयात् attains.  
