1::35::1::Viswamitra lay on the bank of Sona with the ascetics, for the rest of the night. (Getting up) at daybreak he said:
1::35::2::Rama, the night makes way for the dawn. It is time for morning rituals. Arise, arise May the day bring good news Get ready for the onward journey.
1::35::3::On hearing his words Rama performed morning oblations and getting ready for the onward journey spoke:
1::35::4:: O knower of Brahman Clean waters of this river are adorned with sandbanks. This Sona is deep. Which way shall we cross this river?
1::35::5::Having been addressed by Rama thus Viswamitra said, We shall take the way the ascetics have gone before.
1::35::6::With these words of the wise Viswamitra the ascetics moved forward surveying various forests.
1::35::7::After travelling a long distance for half a day, they saw Jahnavi, the best among rivers  haunted or worshipped by ascetics.
1::35::8::On seeing the river Ganga with swans and cranes floating on the surface of the  sacred waters, all the sages including the sons of the Raghus (Rama and Lakshmana) were delighted.
1::35::9::The birds had made the bank of the river their home. They (Rama and Lakshmana) took a dip and offered traditional oblations to ancestors. Thereafter they lighted the sacrificial fire and made customary offerings to the fire and partook of the nectarlike remains. With cheerful hearts they stood round the illustrious Viswamitra and entered the sacred bank of Jahnavi.
1::35::10::Then Rama said to Viswamitra O venerable one I wish to know why Ganga flowing in three directions, occupy (purified) the three worlds before entering the sea, the lord of rivers?
1::35::11:: Prompted by Rama's words, maharshi Viswamitra started narrating the account of the birth and progress of river Ganga. 
1::35::12::O Rama the great mountain named Himavan is a treasuretrove of ores. He is the king of mountains. He had two daughters, unrivalled in beauty in this world.
1::35::13:: O Rama Himavan's beloved of beautiful waist, wellknown by the name of Manorama is the daughter of Mount Meru. She is the mother to both the daughters.
1::35::14::O son of the Raghus this Ganga was born to Manorama as Himavan's eldest daughter. A second one  born to him was wellknown by the name of Uma.
1::35::15::Thereupon all the devatas desirous of deriving some advantage proposed that the eldest daughter of the king of mountains, Ganga, flowing in three directions be given to them.
1::35::16::In order to do good to the three worlds Himavan, rooted in dharma gifted his eldest daughter Ganga who sanctifies the whole world by flowing at her free will৷৷
1::35::17::The devatas having received Ganga committed to the welfare of the three worlds went back to their abodes with a sense of fulfilment in their mind.
1::35::18::O Delight of the Raghus The other daughter of the mountain Himavan was a maiden whose wealth was tapas. She pursued a vow and observed severe austerities.
1::35::19::Himavan the best of mountains gave his daughter Uma associated with severe austerities and venerated by the whole world in marriage to the unrivalled  Rudra.
1::35::20::O son of the Raghus Ganga, the holiest of rivers and Uma devi  are two daughters of the king of the mountains, (Himavan). They are worshipped by the entire world. 
1::35::21::O child with a marvellous gait I have related to you about Ganga flowing across the three worlds, Ganga who reached the heaven first and all that.
1::35::22::The divine Ganga, daughter of Himavan, beautiful and sinless, carrying a large volume of water ascended the heavens.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे पञ्चत्रिंशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the thirtyfifth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
