1::13::1::After completion of one year when spring returned, the valiant king (Dasaratha) entered the sacrificial pavilion to worship celestial beings for begetting sons.
1::13::2::After offering humble salutations and worshipping sage Vasishta in accordance with prescribed ordinance for begetting children, he obediently said:
1::13::3::O foremost among ascetics O brahman, may the sacrifice be performed according to  tradition in such a manner that the sacrifice is performed unhindered.
1::13::4::You are an affectionate friend and most reverential spiritual guide to me. The burden of performing the sacrifice which has since commenced shall be borne by you.  
1::13::5::The great among brahmins answered him saying I shall do everything as proposed by you.
1::13::6::Thereafter Vasishta summoned those brahmins who are experienced in the sacrificerelated activities venerable and righteous architects skilled workers brick makers, carpenters, diggers, artisans, account keepers, dancers and actors, men versed in scriptures and honest, wellinformed people and addressed them saying, In accordance with the king's command let the work of the sacrificial ceremony be inauguarated. Let thousands of bricks be brought. Let temporary residential buildings be erected with all the comforts to accommodate royal guests. 
1::13::7::
1::13::8::In the same manner let widely spread residential accommodation be furnished with many items of food and all kinds of entertainment be provided for people from other lands.
1::13::9:: In the same way people coming from rural areas also should be duly, not casualy treated with respect.
1::13::10::People from all castes should be welltreated with respect. There should be no insult to any one through lust on greed on anger.
1::13::11::The people deeply immersed in performing sacrificerelated activities and sculptors be specially honoured according to their nature of work. All of them should be satisfied with money and food.
1::13::12::Every thing should be wellmanaged. In whatever manner you do, not even the smallest things be left out. Carry out the work with love and affection in your hearts.
1::13::13::Then all of them approached Vasishta and said, everything has been wellarranged in accordance with your instruction. There is no deficiency. Everything will be done as instructed by you without leaving out anything. 
1::13::14::Then Vasishta, having summoned Sumantra said to him Invite all the righteous kings on earth.
1::13::15::Extend an honourable invitation to brahmins, kshatriyas, merchants and sudras in their thousands residing in all countries.
1::13::16::You may personally go and bring with due honour king Janaka who is the distinguished king of Mithila, a warrior whose truth is his strength proficient in all scriptures and the Vedas. Since he is an old ally, I am telling you in advance.
1::13::17::Similarly, you may personally escort king of Kasi who is always affectionate and sweettongued. He is a friend to our king who is a lion among rulers.
1::13::18::Likewise bring here the aged and very righteous king of Kekaya along with his sons. He is fatherinlaw to this lion among kings (Dasaratha).
1::13::19::Bring with honour king of Anga, Romapada, famous and prosperous. He is an intimate friend of the king (Dasaratha).
1::13::20::Bring kings from the countries of the eastern and southern regions, from Sindhu, Sauvera and Saurashtra৷৷ 
1::13::21::Bring all other kings of this earth, who are friendly with us. Along with their retinues, families and relatives.  
1::13::22::Having heard the words of Vasishta, Sumantra speedily despatched virtuous and auspicious emissaries to bring the kings.
1::13::23::In accordance with the ascetic's order, righteous Sumantra himself quickly set out to escort Janaka and other kings.
1::13::24::All the workers reported to the wise sage, Vasishta about the tasks completed for the sacrifice.  
1::13::25::Then, well pleased, the best among brahmins (Vasishta) said to them all Nobody should be offered any thing with disregard. Anything given with contempt undoubtedly  results in the destruction of the donor.
1::13::26::Meanwhile kings from several countries to travelling nights and days arrived bringing with them various kinds of (precious) gifts.
1::13::27::Thereupon, wellpleased, Vasishta addressing Dasaratha said O best among men, beacuse of your command, kings from various countries have arrived. I have extended due hospitality to those noble kings according to their station.
1::13::28::O king, persons with composed minds have made preparations for the yaga. Now be pleased to leave for sacrificial altar nearby to perform yaga.
1::13::29::O foremost of kings, you ought to see the sacrificial ground full of sources of entertainment arranged everywhere, as though improvised by imagination.
1::13::30::In response to the words of Vasishta and Rsyasringa, the Lord of the earth (Dasaratha) entered the sacrificial pavilion on a favourable day presided over by an auspicious star. 
1::13::31::At that moment the best of brahmins led by Vasishta and headed by Rsyasringa, entered the sacrificial enclosure and began the sacrifice in accordance with traditions and scriptural stipulations.                     इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे त्रयोदशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the thirteenth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
