1::11::1::राजेन्द्र O Great king, स: that Sanatkumara, देवप्रवर: great among celestial beings, यथा in what so ever manner, कथायाम् in the story, अब्रवीत् narrated, एवम् in this way, मे my, हितम्  beneficial, वचनम् words, भूय: एव again, शृणु listen.
1::11::2::श्रीमान् auspicious one, सत्यप्रतिश्रव: true to his promise, राजा king, दशरथो नाम्ना named Dasaratha, सुधार्मिक: highly righteous, इक्ष्वाकूणाम् of Ikshvaku kings', कुले in the race, जात: भविष्यति will be born indeed.
1::11::3::तस्य राज्ञ: to that king (Dasaratha), अङ्गराजेन with the king of Anga, सख्यं च friendship, भविष्यति will develop, अस्य for that king of Anga, महाभागा highly virtuous, शान्ता नाम named Shanta, कन्या daughter, भविष्यति will be born.
1::11::4::स:अङ्गराज्यस्य पुत्रस्तु that Anga king's son, रोमपाद इति Romapada by name, श्रुत:will be wellknown, महायशा: very famous, स: that, राजा king (Dasaratha), तम् him, गमिष्यति will approach.
1::11::5::धर्मात्मन् O Follower of righteousness, अनपत्य: अस्मि I am without children, शान्ताभर्ता husband of Shanta, त्वया by you, आज्ञप्त: ordered, मम my, कुलस्य of race, सन्तानार्थम् for the sake of children (for perpetuation of my race), क्रतुम् sacrifice, आहरेत he may perform.
1::11::6::आत्मवान् prudent and wise, राज्ञ: king's, तद्वाक्यम् that statement, श्रुत्वा having heard, अथ thereafter, स: he, मनसा विचिन्त्य च after thinking over deeply in the mind, पुत्रवन्तम् him who has sons, शान्ताभर्तारम् husband of Shanta, प्रदास्यते will offer.  
1::11::7::स: राजा that king, तं विप्रम् that brahmin, प्रतिगृह्य च having received (along with him), विगतज्वर: relieved of his mental suffering, प्रहृष्टेन with highly delighted, अन्तरात्मना heart, तं यज्ञम् that sacrifice, आहरिष्यति will perform.
1::11::8::यष्टुकाम: desirous of performing sacrifice, धर्मवित् knower of dharma, नरेश्वर: lord of the people, दशरथ:राजा king Dasaratha, कृताञ्जलि: with folded palms, द्विजश्रेष्ठम् best among  brahmins, ऋष्यशृङ्गम् Rsyasringa, यज्ञार्थम् for the sake of sacrifice, प्रसवार्थं च in order to obtain children, स्वर्गार्थं च to attain heaven, वरयिष्यति will choose him, स: विशांपति: lord of the people, द्विजमुख्यात् from that prominent brahmin, तं कामम् those desires, लभते च will get.
1::11::9::अस्य to him, अमितविक्रमा: men of immense prowess, वंशप्रतिष्ठानकरा: bringing glory and fame to their dynasty, सर्वलोकेषु in all the worlds, विश्रुता: renowned, चत्वार: four, पुत्रा: sons, भविष्यन्ति will be born. 
1::11::10::देवप्रवर: great among devatas, भगवान् holy, प्रभु: competent, स: that, सनत्कुमार: Sanat kumara, पुरा in the early period of, देवयुगे in Krita yuga, कथाम् this story, एवम् in this way, कथितवान् narrated.
1::11::11::पुरुषशार्दूल greatest among men, महाराज O King, स: त्वम्  such a man you are, सबलवाहन: along with his foreces and vehicles, स्वयमेव personally, गत्वा having gone, सुसत्कृतम् wellhonoured, तम् him, आनय bring.
1::11::12::सूतवाक्यम् the charioteer's (Sumantra's) words, निशम्य having heard, वसिष्ठं च अनुमान्य obtaining the consent of Vasishta, सान्त:पुर: accompanied by queens, सहामात्य: along with courtiers, स:द्विज: that brahmin, यत्र to the place where he resided, प्रययौ departed.
1::11::13::शनै: शनै: slowly and slowly, वनानि forests, सरितश्चैव rivers, व्यतिक्रम्य crossing, मुनिपुङ्गव: foremost of ascetics, यत्र where he was, तं देशम् that place, अभिचक्राम reached.
1::11::14::आसाद्य having reached, रोमपादसमीपगम् seated beside king Romapada, दीप्यमानम् glowing, अनलमिव like fire, द्विजश्रेष्ठम् best of brahmins, तं ऋषिपुत्रम् that  son of sage, आदौ in the begining, ददर्श beheld.
1::11::15::तत: then, राजा king Romapada, प्रहृष्टेन with delight, अन्तरात्मना in the heart, यथान्यायम् as per tradition, सखित्वात् due to friendship, विशेषत: specially, तस्य of that, राज्ञ: king Dasaratha, पूजाम् respectful salutations, चक्रे offered.
1::11::16::रोमपादेन by Romapada, सख्यम् friendship, सम्बन्धकं चैव relationship, धीमते to the intellectual, ऋषिपुत्राय son of the sage, आख्यातम् narrated, तदा then, तम् him (Romapada), प्रत्यपूजयत् in return felicitatetd.
1::11::17::एवम् in this manner, सुसत्कृत: wellhonoured, नरर्षभ: the great among men, राजा king Dasaratha, तेन सह along with him, सप्ताष्ट seven or eight, दिवसान् days, उषित्वा having dwelt, राजानम् addressing Romapada, इदम् these words, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::11::18::विशांपते O Lord of people, राजन् king, तव सुता your daughter, शान्ता Shanta, सह भर्त्रा along with her husband, मदीयनगरम् to my city, यातु let her go, महत् important, कार्यम् religious rite, उद्यतम् is planned.
1::11::19::राजा king, तथा इति be it so, धीमत: of the wise man, तस्य गमनम्  for his departure, संश्रुत्य having agreed, त्वम् you, भार्यया सह along with your wife, गच्छ please go, विप्रम् brahmin, वचनम् words, उवाच spoke.
1::11::20::तदा then, ऋषिपुत्र: son of sage, प्रतिश्रुत्य having assented, नृपम् the king, तथा इति so it shall be done, आह said, नृपेण by king, अभ्यनुज्ञात: having been permitted, भार्यया सह along with his wife, प्रययौ departed. 
1::11::21::तौ both, दशरथ: Dasaratha, वीर्यवान् valiant, रोमपादश्च and Romapada, अन्योन्याञ्जलिम् each other wishing with folded palms, कृत्वा having done, स्नेहात् with friendship, उरसा heart to heart, संश्लिष्य embracing each other, ननन्दतु: were pleased.   
1::11::22::तत: then, रघुनन्दन: Dasaratha, सुहृदम् friend, आपृच्छ्य having taken leave, प्रस्थित: set out, शीघ्रगामिन: swiftly going, दूतान् messengers, पौरेभ्य: to the citizens, प्रेषयामास despatched.
1::11::23::सर्वम् the entire, नगरम् city, क्षिप्रमेव immediately, स्वलङ्कृतम् well decorated, धूपितम् perfumed, सिक्तसम्मृष्टम् sprinkled with water and cleaned, पताकाभि: with flags, अलङ्कृतम् decorated, क्रियताम् let it be done.
1::11::24::तत: then, ते पौरा: the people of Ayodhya, राजानम् the king, आगतम् arrival, श्रुत्वा having heard, प्रहृष्टा: overjoyed, राज्ञा by king, यत् यथा as per, प्रेषितम् sent, तत् सर्वम् all that, तथा in the same manner, प्रचक्रु: fulfilled.
1::11::25::तत: then, राजा king, द्विजर्षभम् foremost of brahmins, पुरस्कृत्य keeping in the forefront, स्वलङ्कृतम् welldecorated, तत् that, नगरम् city, शङ्खदुन्दुभिनिर्घोषै: with conches blowing and drums beating, प्रविवेश ह entered. 
1::11::26::तत: then, सर्वे नागरा: all citizens, इन्द्रकर्मणां equivalent to Indra in valiant, नरेन्द्रेण by that king, सत्कृत्य having been honoured, प्रवेश्यमानम् entering, तम् that, द्विजम् brahmin, दृष्ट्वा after seeing, प्रमुदिता: were delighted. 
1::11::27::एनम् Rsyasringa, अन्त:पुरं प्रवेश्य having taken him to the inner apartment, शास्त्रत: traditionally as enjoined by the scriptures, पूजां welcome, कृत्वा having made, तदा then, तस्य उपवाहनात् for bringing him here, आत्मानम् himself, कृतकृत्यम् has accomplished his object, मेने thought.
1::11::28::अन्त:पुर स्त्रिय: royal ladies, सर्वा: all, तथा in that manner, भर्त्रा सह along with her husband, आगताम् arrived, विशालाक्षीम् wideeyed lady, शान्ताम् Shanta, दृष्ट्वा having seen, प्रीत्या affectionately, आनन्दम् delight, उपागमन् experienced.
1::11::29::सा she, ताभि: with them, विशेषत: especially, राज्ञा चैव with the king, पूज्यमाना honoured and worshipped, सुखिता comforted, ऋत्विजा सह along with sage Rsyasringa, कञ्चित् कालम् for some time, तत्र there, उवास dwelt.
