1::39::1::Immensely pleased with the words of Viswamitra, to the ascetic flaming bright like fire, Rama spoke towards the end of the narration:
1::39::2::O Brahman I wish to listen in detail as to how my ancestors made preparations for the sacrifice? Prosperity to you. 
1::39::3::Viswamitra addressing the son of the Kakusthas (Rama) with a smile said, O Rama hear in detail the story of the magnanimous king Sagara. 
1::39::4::Sankara's fatherinlaw named Himavan is the greatest mountain. Himavan and Vindhya came close and began looking at one another. (because both are of extreme height and in between them there was no obstruction).
1::39::5::O best of men, the sacrifice took place in the region in between these two  mountains. O tiger among men the region was appropriate for conducting sacrificial acts. 
1::39::6:: O child, O son of the Kakutsthas, the great charioteer Anshuman (who can fight with eleven thousand charioteers), wielding a strong bow  followed the  sacrificial horse (in order to protect it) in compliance with Sagara's wish.
1::39::7::On the concluding day of the fortnight (full moon day) while the sacrifice was being performed, Vasava (Indra) assuming the form of rakshasa, had stolen away Sagara's sacrificial horse. 
1::39::8::O son of the Kakutsthas, when the magnanimous king Sagara's sacrificial horse was stolen away, all the high priests addressing the performer of the sacrifice said:
1::39::9::'O Kakutstha on this auspicious (fullmoon) day the sacrificial horse has been stolen away suddenly and forcibly. Slay the thief and bring back the horse'.
1::39::10:: 'This flaw in sacrifice will be inauspicious for all of us. Hence O king do everything which will ensure flawlessness to this sacrifice'.
1::39::11:: Having heard the words of the officiating priests, the king (Sagara) addressed his sixty thousand sons in the sacrificial assembly, saying:
1::39::12:: 'O Best among men, O sons I do not the hand of rakshasas in this as this great sacrifice is consecrated by mantras (to prevent any interruption) and is presided over by eminent priests.
1::39::13::'Therefore my sons, go and search this entire earth surrounded by oceans. May you be safe'.
1::39::14::'O sons, acquiring yojana by yojana the length and breadth of the earth, search for the  thief of the horse. Excavate the earth till the time the horse is found. This is my command'. 
1::39::15::'Having been initiated into the sacrifice, I, along with my grandson, Anshuman and  other spiritual preceptors will stay here till such time the horse is found. May you be safe'  
1::39::16::O Rama thus commanded by Sagara, the highly powerful princes with cheeful hearts departed in obedience to their father's command in quest of the horse on earth.
1::39::17::O Tiger among men each one of them occupying one yojana in length and breadth of ground, dug up the earth with their nails that were sharp as diamonds.   
1::39::18::O Son of the Raghus (Rama) dreadful sounds emanated while the earth was being broken open by  ploughs and lances similar to thunderbolt.
1::39::19::O descendant of Raghu when the earth was being churned, an irrepressible sound of serpents, demons and rakshasas --of all creatures emerged.
1::39::20::O Descendant of the Raghus the heroic sons of Sagara excavated sixty thousand yojanas of earth reaching the nether world (one of the several regions below the earth). 
1::39::21::O Foremost among men (Rama) the princes while thus excavating Jambu dweepa,  in this way filled with mountains, moved around everywhere.
1::39::22::Then the gods together with the gandharvas, asuras and serpents in bewildered minds approached Lord Brahma.
1::39::23:: With highly agitated minds and meloncholic faces, all of them approached magnanimous Brahma and having propitiated him said:    
1::39::24::O Venerable one the entire earth is being excavated by the sons of Sagara. Many great beings living in the lower worlds are being killed.
1::39::25::'This one  is the destroyer of our sacrifice. He  has stolen away our horse' saying so the sons of Sagara are slaying all living beings.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकोनचत्वारिंशस्सर्ग: ।।Thus ends the thirtyninth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
