1::29::1::The highly lustrous Viswamitra heard the words of Rama of immeasurable prowess. On his (Rama's) query about the forest, Viswamitra explains.
1::29::2:: O mightyarmed Rama Lord Visnu, the foremost among the gods, and master the great ascetic lived here carrying out yogic practices and penance for innumerable years  constituting hundreds of yugas.
1::29::3::O Rama this was the hermitage of glorious Vamana. The great sage her performed his ascetic pratices here, hence it is known as siddhashrama.
1::29::4:: During the period Visnu (in the incarnation of Vamana) was observing austerities at this hermitage, king Bali, son of Virochana, having vanquished Indra and maruts and devatas ruled this kingdom and became famous in all the three worlds (for his prowess and generosity.)
1::29::5::While Bali was performing the sacrifice (to confirm his position as lord of the three worlds), the devas got together with Agni in the forefront and approached Lord Visnu at this hermitage, saying:
1::29::6:: 'O Visnu son of Virochana is performing a great sacrifice. Before its completion, our purpose ought to be achieved'.
1::29::7::'He is granting the seekers whatever, wherever and in whichever maner they, coming from here and there approach him for favour'.
1::29::8:: O Visnu perform this supreme, auspicious act assuming the form of a dwarf through, the power of illusion for the welfare of the devatas'.  
1::29::9:: O Rama in the mean time revered Kasyapa resplendent like the god of fire radiating lustre with Aditi who had completed a thousand divine years of austerities pleased (with her penance) the conferer of boons, Lord Madhusudana (Visnu) (And she said to Visnu):
1::29::10::You are all ascetism, a mass of tapas, and an embodiment of tapas. Your soul is tapas. O Purushottama I am beholding you after a rigorous penance.
1::29::11:: O Lord I am beholding this entire universe in your body. You are beginningless and  indescribable. I take refuge in you.
1::29::12::Addressing Kasyapa whose sins had been washed clean, Lord Visnu pleased (with his penance) said: Be prosperous you are dear to me. Worthy of a boon. Ask.
1::29::13::Having heard those words of Vishnu, Kasyapa, son of Maricha, replied, O bestower of boons, O great practitioner of austerities Be pleased to grant a boon for Aditi, devatas and for myself.
1::29::14::O Sinless Lord, Be born son to Aditi and to me, O Destroyer of asuras, be the younger brother to Indra. You can help these sorrowstricken devatas.
1::29::15:: O Lord of the celestials, with my penance accomplished (here) this place will be known as siddhaashrama by your grace. O Lord arise from here.
1::29::16::Then the resplendent Visnu, born from the womb of Aditi and assuming the form of Vamana, approached, the son of Virochana (Bali).
1::29::17::Thereafter, Visnu, soul of the universe who restores respect (for the righeous), and renders the welfare of all living beings, having begged from Bali, and been granted three places to put his footsteps on occupied the (three) worlds and by restraining Bali with his energy, gave (it) back to Mahendra. In this manner the highly lustrous Visnu, gave  possession of the three worlds to Mahendra.
1::29::18:: This asrama, which relieves fatigue, previously under the possession of Vamana, has come under my occoupation for my devotion to him.
1::29::19:: O tiger among men, wicked rakshasas who prowl about the asram and cause obstacles ought to be killed here only.
1::29::20:: O Rama, now let's go to the unparalleled Siddhashrama. O child this asrama is the same to you as it is to me (treat this as your own).
1::29::21::While enetering the hermitage the great ascetic appeared resplendent (in the company of Rama and Lakshmana) like the moon in conjunction with Punarvasu star emerging out of  the mist.
1::29::22::At the sight of Viswamitra all the ascetics, inmates of Siddhashrama, jumped out instantly and offered him their worship.
1::29::23::They extended hospitality to both the princes in the same way they offered their worship to the sagacious Viswamitra.
1::29::24::The two princes of the lineage of Raghu, destroyers of foes rested a while and then said to Viswamitra, a tiger amon sages:
1::29::25::O foremost of ascetics Get initialed today. You will prosper and this asram will attain its fulfilment. Your words shall come true.
1::29::26::Saying this, Viswamitra, the great saint effulgent and self trained engaged himself in the  initiation ceremony.
1::29::27::The two princes spent the right comfortably and woke up at daybreak. They  performed morning in accordance with the prescribed rule, ablutions, said their prayers and paid their respects to Viswamitra seated at the kindled firesacrifice.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकोनत्रिंशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the twentyninth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
