1::7::1::महात्मन: of the magnanimous, तस्य his, इक्ष्वाको: of the descendent of Ikshvaku, गुणै:  with virtues, मन्त्रज्ञाश्च competent counsellors, इङ्गितज्ञाश्च skilled in judging motives from the features of the face, नित्यम् always, प्रियहिते doing all that was dear and could bring welfare to the king, रता: intent on, अमात्या: ministers, आसन् existed.
1::7::2:: वीरस्य of the mighty, यशस्विन: glorious, तस्य for that king Dasaratha, शुचय: free from blemish in dealings, नित्यशः ever, राजकृत्येषु in royal duties, अनुरक्ताश्च loyally devoted, अष्टौ eight, अमात्या: ministers, बभूवु: had been employed.
1::7::3:: धृष्टि: Dhrishti, जयन्त: Jayanta, विजय: Vijaya, सिद्धार्थ: Siddhartha, अर्थसाधक: Arthasadhaka, अशोक: Ashoka, मन्त्रपालश्च Mantrapala, सुमन्त्रः Sumantra, अष्टम: eigth, अभवत् were present.
1::7::4::तस्य for him, वसिष्ठ: Vasihta, वामदेव: च and Vamadeva, द्वौ two, ऋषिसत्तमौ excellent rishis, अभिमतौ highly desired, ऋत्विजौ family priests, आस्ताम् existed, तथा and, अपरे some other, मन्त्रिणश्च counsellors also.
1::7::5::विद्याविनीता: well educated in all branches of knowledge, ह्रीमन्त: those who feel ashamed to do unjust acts, कुशला: proficient, नियतेन्द्रिया: those having restrained senses, श्रीमन्तश्च wealthy, महात्मान: illustrious, शास्त्रज्ञा: versed in shastras, दृढविक्रमा: steadfast in  prowess, कीर्तिमन्त: renowned, प्रणिहिता: fixing their attention on their thoughts, यथावचनकारिण: doing in accordance with word, तेज:क्षमायश:प्राप्ता: possessing splendour forgiveness and fame, स्मितपूर्वाभिभाषिण: speaking with a smile.
1::7::6:: क्रोधात् either in anger, कामार्थहेतोर्वा or for the reason of pecuniary gains or for desire, अनृतम् untruth or unjust, वच: word, न ब्रूयु: do not utter, स्वेषु in the midst of their own, परेषु वा or among their enemies, क्रियमाणम् what was being done, कृतं वापि or what had been done, चिकीर्षितम् or intended to be done, तेषाम् for them, चारेण through spies, अविदितम्  unknown, किञ्चित् even little, नास्ति was not there.
1::7::7:: ते those ministers, व्यवहारेषु in their dealings, कुशला: competent, सौहृदेषु in friendship, परीक्षिता: tested, सुतेष्वपि even in the matter of sons, प्राप्तकालम् appropriately, दण्डम्   punishment, धारयेयु: used to impose.
1::7::8:: कोशसङ्ग्रहणे in replenishing the exchequer, बलस्य army's, परिग्रहे च also holding, युक्ता:  experts, अदूषकम् who did not commit any offence, अहितं पुरुषमपि those who were not wellwishers, न विहिंस्यु: never inflicted with punishment.
1::7::9::वीराश्च mighty and powerful, नियतोत्साहा: possessing steady perseverance, राजशास्त्रम् state policy, अनुष्ठिता: followed, विषयवासिनाम् living in the state, शुचीनाम् of virtuous people, नित्यम् always, रक्षितारश्च protectors. 
1::7::10::ब्रह्म brahmanas, क्षत्रम् kshatriyas, अहिंसन्त: did not cause pain (in thought, word and deed), ते they, कोशम् treasury, समपूरयन् filled, पुरुषस्य for a person, बलाबलम् strength and weakness, सम्प्रेक्ष्य investigating, सुतीक्ष्णदण्डा: inflicted  stringent punishments. 
1::7::11::शुचीनाम् of the chaste in conduct, एकबुद्धीनाम् unanimous in decisionmaking, सर्वेषाम् of all men, सम्प्रजानताम् administrating the kingdom, पुरे वा either in the city, राष्ट्रे वा or in the kingdom, क्वचित् anywhere, मृषावादी was a liar, नर: man, नासीत् did not exist.
1::7::12::तत्र in that kingdom, दुष्ट: wicked, परदाररत: enamoured of others' wives, नर: men, कश्चित् even one, नासीत् did not exist, सर्वम् entire, राष्ट्रम् empire, तत् that, पुरवरं च best of cities, प्रशान्तम् आसीत् serenity prevailed.
1::7::13::ते सर्वे all the ministers, सुवासस: wore excellent clothes, सुवेषाश्च well adorned, सुशीलिन: good character, नरेन्द्रस्य king's, हितार्थम् for the welfare of, नयचक्षुषा with politics as their eyes, जाग्रत: vigilant.
1::7::14::गुरोः from elderly venerable persons like father, mother etc, गुणगृहीता: receiving inspiration through their virtues, पराक्रमे in the matter of prowess, प्रख्याता: renowned, सर्वत: in all affairs, बुद्धिनिश्चयात् guided by their intellect, विदेशेष्वपि in other countries as well, विज्ञाता: were famous.
1::7::15::सन्धिविग्रहतत्त्वज्ञा: well aware of the real nature of peace or war, प्रकृत्या inherently, सम्पदा by affluent, अन्विता: possessed, मन्त्रसंवरणे in keeping the plans secretly, शक्ता: capable, सूक्ष्मासु in sharp, बुद्धिषु in comprehension, श्लक्ष्णा: gracious, नीतिशास्त्रविशेषज्ञा: distinguished in the science of ethics and morality, सततम् always, प्रियवादिन: spoke pleasing words.
1::7::16::अनघ: free from sin, दशरथ: राजा king Dasaratha, गुणोपेतै: by those endowed with virtues, ईदृशै: with such, अमात्यै: ministers, उपपन्न: surrounded, वसुन्धराम् earth, अन्वशासत् ruled.
1::7::17::पुरुषव्याघ्र: tiger among men, स: king Dasaratha, चारेण with spies, अवेक्षमाण: guarding, प्रजा: the poeple, रञ्जयन् pleasing, प्रजानाम् of people, पालनं कुर्वन् protecting, अधर्मान्  unrighteous ones, परिवर्जयन् deserting, वदान्य: munificient, सत्यसङ्गर: undertaking to uphold truth, त्रिषु लोकेषु in the three worlds, विश्रुत: wellknown, इमाम् this, पृथिवीम् earth, धर्मेण with righteousness, शशास reigned.
1::7::18::मित्रवान् having many friends, नतसामन्त: humbled tributary kings, प्रतापहतकण्टक: slayed the  thorny enemies with might, आत्मन: for himself, विशिष्टं वा superior, तुल्यं वा or equal, शत्रुम् foe, नाध्यगच्छत् did not meet, स: राजा that king, देवपति: Indra, यथा like, जगत् world, शशास ruled.
1::7::19::मन्त्रहिते in counselling for  his welfare, नियुक्तै: appointed, अनुरक्तै: by the affectionate ones, कुशलै: skilful ones, समर्थै: by the capable, तै: मन्त्रिभि: with those ministers, वृत:  surrounded by, स: पार्थिव: the king, तेजोमयै: luminous, गोभि: by rays, युक्त: filled with, उदित: rising, अर्क: इव like the Sun, दीप्तिम् brightness, अवाप obtained.
