1::43::1:: O Rama when that God of the gods (Brahma) departed, Bhagiratha, pressing the earth with the tip of his big toe (standing supported by the big toe) penanced (meditated upon Siva) for one year.
1::43::2:: After one full year was completed, Iswara who is worshipped by all in all the worlds said to king Bhagiratha:
1::43::3::O Best of men  I am pleased with your devotion. I will hold Ganga on my head, the daughter of the king of mountains (to reduce  the force of her descent). I shall do your wish.
1::43::4::Then Ganga, the eldest daughter of Himavat who is adored by all the worlds, assuming the form of a mighty river descended from the sky with unbearable speed on the auspicious head of Siva. 
1::43::5::Goddess Ganga, extremely difficult to contain, thought that seizing Siva with her flow she would enter the lower regions of the earth.
1::43::6::Then the threeeyed Lord Siva, aware of her proud intentions applied his intelligence to conceal her.
1::43::7::O Rama that sacred river (Ganga), descended on to the depths of the matted locks on the holy head of Siva resembling the mount Himavan.
1::43::8::Trapped in the matted locks, she (Ganga) could not come out. With all her efforts she could not reach the earth.
1::43::9::There the golden Ganga wandered about for many years. Bhagiratha not finding Ganga, once again resorted to great penance.
1::43::10::O Son of the Raghus (Rama) Siva was immensely pleased with the penace and thereafter released Ganga (drop by drop) forming Bindusara.
1::43::11::As she (Ganga) was released, she branched out into seven streams. Three streams known as Hladini, Pavani and Nalini having auspicious waters and conferring prosperity flowed eastwards.
1::43::12::Auspicious Suchakshu, Sita and a great river Sindhu, these three great rivers flowed  westwards.
1::43::13::The seventh stream among them followed Bhagiratha. The most brilliant rajarshi Bhagiratha also mounting on divine chariot raced forward and Ganga followed him. 
1::43::14::From the sky on to the head of Shankara and thence Ganga resorted to the earth. There it flowed forward with a roaring sound.
1::43::15::Then the earth looked bright with the fallen and falling shoals of fish, turtles and multitudes  of other seaanimals.
1::43::16:: Then devarshis, gandharvas, yakshas and hosts of siddhas looked on with astonishment at Ganga falling from the sky and descending on the earth.
1::43::17::Then, gods in a state of excitement in their aerial chariots as large as cities, on horses and on big elephants were stationed there (in the sky).
1::43::18::Gods with great lustre arrived to witness the most wonderful, grand descent of Ganga.  
1::43::19::The cloudless sky shone with the radiance of the ornaments of the gods alighting speedily to witness Ganga. It appeared as though the sky was filled with a hundred Suns. 
1::43::20::The sky strewn with lightnings appeared as if it was inhabited by seaanimals, serpents and fishes fickle.
1::43::21:: White foams of water were scattered in a thousand ways. It appeared as if the sky was  spread over with autumnal clouds flocks of swans. 
1::43::22::Ganga was flowing now rapid, now slow, now wide, now meandering, now low, now high. 
1::43::23::Sometimes waves dashed against waves. They rose repeatedly upwards and fell down on the ground. 
1::43::24::The waters of Ganga descended on Shankara's head and from there to the earth. Freed from all impurities, the waters looked pure and clean.
1::43::25::Considering the waters fallen from the head of Siva sacred, devatas, rishis and gandharvas and those living on earth touched it (with reverence).  
1::43::26::Those cursed to fall from heaven to earth were absolved of their sins after bathing there (in the waters of Ganga).
1::43::27:: Cleansed of their sins by the sparkling waters, they ascended through the sky once again to their own (celestial) worlds.
1::43::28:: People rejoiced at the sight of those shining waters. They were happy  to have a dip in Ganga and their fatigue was gone.
1::43::29::Most brilliant rajarshi Bhagiratha also mounting the divine chariot moved forward and Ganga followed him.
1::43::30::O Rama besides acquatic beings, rishis, devatas, daityas, danavas, rakshasas along with kinnaras, serpents, foremost of gandharvas, yakshas and apsaras all followed the chariot of Bhagiratha. They were happy to follow Ganga.
1::43::31:: Ganga, famous and foremost of rivers, destroyer of all sins, flowed in the direction  king Bhagiratha moved.
1::43::32::Then while Ganga was flowing, it inundated the sacrificial ground of the great sage Jahnu. Jahnu who used to work wonders was performing a sacrifice.  
1::43::33::O Descendant of the Raghu dynasty sage Jahnu who was performing the sacrifice, observed her pride and grew  furious. And astonishingly drank the entire waters of Ganga.
1::43::34::Devatas, rishis and gandharvas stood amazed (at this act). They worshipped the magnanimous Jahnu, noblest among men. The devatas entreated the illustrious Jahnu to treat Ganga as his daughter.
1::43::35::The brilliant (Jahnu) was pleased. He released her through both his both ears. Hence Ganga is called Jahnavi, daughter of Jahnu. 
1::43::36::Ganga, best among rivers, following the chariot of Bhagiratha, reached the ocean. She entered the nether regions of the earth in order to fulfil his mission (salvation of the sons of Sagara).
1::43::37::Rajarshi Bhagiratha, having brought Ganga with supreme efforts, saw with a sad heart his grandfathers reduced to ashes.
1::43::38::O Best of the Raghus thereafter the holy waters of Ganga inundated those heaps of ashes and the sons of Sagara, purged of their sins, reached heaven (said Viswamitra).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे त्रिचत्वारिंशस्सर्ग:।। Thus ends the fortythird sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
