1::18::1::महात्मन: magnanimous king Dasaratha's, तस्मिन् हयमेधे  when Aswamedha, क्रतौ sacrifice, निर्वृत्ते सति had been completed, सुरा: devatas, भागान् their share of Havis, प्रतिगृह्य having received, यथागतम् from wherever they came, प्रतिजग्मु: returned.
1::18::2::पत्नीगणसमन्वित: together with his queens, राजा king Dasaratha, समाप्तदीक्षानियम: having observed the rules of initiation, सभृत्यबलवाहन: along with his servants, army chariots, पुरीम् city of Ayodhya, प्रविवेश entered.
1::18::3::पृथिवीश्वरा: lords of the earth, kings,तेन राज्ञा by that king (Dasaratha), यथार्हम् in a fitting manner, पूजिता: having been honoured, मुदिता: pleased, मुनिपुङ्गवम् best of sages, Vasistha, प्रणम्य having made obeisance, देशान् to their own countries, प्रययु: returned.
1::18::4::तत: पुरात्  from that town, स्वपुराणि to their own town, गच्छताम्  set out  for, श्रीमताम् dignified, तेषाम् राज्ञाम् those kings', शुभ्राणि bright, प्रहृष्टानि delighted, बलानि forces, चकाशिरे      shone.
1::18::5::पृथिवीशेषु when kings, गतेषु (सत्सु) departed, तदा then, श्रीमान् the exalted, राजा दशरथ: king Dasaratha, द्विजोत्तमान् foremost of brahmins, पुरस्कृत्य preceded by them, पुरीम् प्रविवेश entered the capital city. 
1::18::6::अथ after that, ऋश्यशृङ्ग: sage Rsyasringa, सुपूजित: having been duly honoured, सानुयात्रेण along his followers, धीमता by the intellectual, राज्ञा king Romapada, अन्वीयमान: was being accompanied, शान्तया सार्धम् with Santa, प्रययौ set out.
1::18::7::राजा king Dasaratha, एवम् in this manner, तान् सर्वान्  all of them, विसृज्य having sent them, सम्पूर्णमानस: with composed mind, पुत्रोत्पत्तिम् about begetting sons, विचिन्तयन् thinking, तत्र there, सुखित: उवास lived happily.
1::18::8::तत: then, यज्ञे when sacrifice, समाप्ते was completed, ऋतूनाम् of seasons, षट् six, समत्ययु: were spent, तत: then, द्वादशे मासे in twelfth month, चैत्रे in Chaitra month, नावमिके तिथौ on the nineth day of the rising Moon, अदितिदैवत्ये presided by Aditi as devata, नक्षत्रे when the star (Punarvasu)was in ascendent, पञ्चसु ग्रहेषु and the five planets (Sun, Mars, Saturn, Jupiter and Venus), स्वोच्चसंस्थेषु in their own exalted houses,  कर्कटे लग्ने in Karkata Lagna, वाक्पतौ when Brihaspati, इन्दुना सह  along with Moon, प्रोद्यमाने was rising, कौसल्या Kausalya, जगन्नाथम् lord of the entire universe, सर्वलोकनमस्कृतम् bowed to by all the worlds, सर्वलक्षणसंयुतम् adorned with all the characteristics, विष्णो: Vishnu's, अर्धम् facet, महाभागम् highly fortunate, ऐक्ष्वाकुवर्धनम्  perpetuating the Ikshvaku race, रामम् Rama, पुत्रम् as his son, अजनयत् gave birth .
1::18::9::कौसल्या Kausalya, अमिततेजसा by one with immeasurable lustre, तेन पुत्रेण by that son, देवानाम् among devatas, by the foremost,वज्रपाणिना by the wielder of Thunderbolt, Indra, अदिति: यथा like Aditi, शुशुभे looked resplendent.
1::18::10::सत्यपराक्रम: having truthful prowess, साक्षात् manifestly, विष्णो: Visnu's, चतुर्भाग: fourth part, सर्वै: गुणै: with every kind of virtue, समुदित: united with, भरतो नाम named Bharata, कैकेय्याम् of Kaikeyi, जज्ञे was born.
1::18::11::अथ then, सुमित्रा Sumitra, वीरौ heroic, सर्वास्त्रकुशलौ skilled in the use of all weapons, विष्णो: Visnu's, अर्धसमन्वितौ having facets of Visnu, लक्ष्मणशत्रुघ्नौ Lakshmana and Satrughna, सुतौ sons, अजनयत् gave birth.
1::18::12::प्रसन्नधी: of pure intellect, भरत: Bharata, पुष्ये when the Pushya star was in ascendant, मीनलग्ने in Meena lagna, जात: was born, सौमित्री sons of Sumitra, सार्पे in Aslesha star, कुलीरे in the Karkata lagna, रवौ when Sun, अभ्युदिते is rising, जातौ were born.
1::18::13::गुणवन्त: endowed with every good quality, अनुरूपा: worthy, रुच्या in brightness,   प्रोष्ठपदोपमा: resembling Purva Bhaadra, Uttara Bhaadra stars, महात्मान: highly noble, राज्ञ: King's, चत्वार: four, पुत्रा: sons, पृथक् successively, जज्ञिरे were born In this manner.
1::18::14::गन्धर्वा: gandharvas, कलम् melodiously, जगुः sang, अप्सरोगणा: groups of apsaras, ननृतु: danced, देवदुन्दुभय: celestial kettle drums, नेदु: sounded, खात् from the sky, पुष्पवृष्टिश्च showers of flowers, च्युता was released, अयोध्यायाम् in the city of Ayodhya, जनाकुल: tumult of men, महान्  great, उत्सवश्च आसीत् festivities took place.
1::18::15::रथ्या: highways, जनसम्बाधा: thickly populated by men, नटनर्तकसङ्कुला: thronged by actors and dancers, गायनैश्च by  singers, वादनै: by performers on different instruments, तथा and,  अपरै: by other euologists and genealogists, विराविण्य: were resounding with noise.
1::18::16::राजा king, सूतमागधवन्दिनाम् for bards, euologists and genealogists, प्रदेयान् च gifts fit to be bestowed, ददौ gave, ब्राह्मणेभ्य: for brahmins, वित्तम् wealth, सहस्रश: in thousands, गोधनानि kine, ददौ gave.
1::18::17::तथा and, एकादशाहम् eleven days, अतीत्य having completed, नामकर्म naming ceremony, अकरोत् he (Vasishta) performed, महात्मानम् illustrious one, ज्येष्ठम् eldest son, रामम् as Rama, कैकयीसुतम् the son of Kaikeyi, भरतम् as Bharata, सौमित्रिम् a son of Sumitra, लक्ष्मणमिति as Lakshmana, अपरम् the other son, शत्रुघ्नम् as Satrughna, परमप्रीत: highly delighted, वसिष्ठ: Vasishta, तदा then, नामानि कृतवान् gave names.
1::18::18::ब्राह्मणान् brahmins, पौरान् inhabitants of the city, जानपदानपि also rural folk, भोजयामास were offered, ब्राह्मणानाम् for Brahmins, अमितम् unlimited, बहु abundant, रत्नौघम् heaps of jewels, अददात् bestowed, तेषाम् for them, जन्मक्रियादीनि rites to be performed at the time of birth, सर्वकर्माणि and all other rites, अकारयत् were made to be performed.
1::18::19::तेषाम् amongst all of them, ज्येष्ठ: eldest, राम: Rama, केतुरिव like flag, पितु: for his father भूय: exceedingly, रतिकर: causing pleasure, स्वयम्भूरिव like Brahma, भूतानाम्  for all living beings, सम्मत:बभूव became highly respectable . 
1::18::20::सर्वे all of them, वेदविद: wellversed in vedas, शूरा: were heroic, सर्वे all, लोकहिते in the welfare of people, रता: devoted, सर्वे all, ज्ञानोपसम्पन्ना: endowed with knowledge, सर्वे all, गुणै: with virtues, समुदिता: were furnished with.
1::18::21::तेषामपि among all of them also, महातेजा: highly lustrous,  सत्यपराक्रम: truly mighty, राम: Rama, निर्मल: free from moral taints, शशाङ्क:इव like moon, सर्वस्य लोकस्य इष्ट: was dear to the entire world.
1::18::22::गजस्कन्धे on mounting elephants, अश्वपृष्ठे च while  riding on the back of horse, रथचर्यासु going about in chariots, सम्मत: has been accepted as skilled, धनुर्वेदे च in archery also, निरत: always engaged, पितृश्शुश्रूषणे in service of his parents, रत: was devoted.
1::18::23::लक्ष्मिवर्धन: causing prosperity to grow, लक्ष्मण: Lakshmana, बाल्यात् प्रभृति from his childhood, लोकरामस्य for a man of delight of the world, ज्येष्ठस्य of the eldest, भ्रातु: of the brother, रामस्य in the matter of Rama, नित्यश: always, सुस्निग्ध: remained very friendly . 
1::18::24::लक्ष्मिसम्पन्न: possessed of auspiciousness, लक्ष्मण: Lakshmana, शरीरत: अपि even by offering his body, सर्वप्रियकर: doing every thing dear to him, तस्य रामस्य for that Rama, अपर: another, बहि: प्राण इव like life moving outside (his body).
1::18::25::पुरुषोत्तमः greatest among men( Rama), तेन विना without Lakshmana, निद्राम् sleep, न लभते did not obtain, उपानीतम् having been presented, मृष्टम्  best cooked, अन्नं च food, तं विना without him, न हि अश्नाति would not partake the same. 
1::18::26::राघव: Raghava, हयम् horse back, आरूढ: mounting on, यदा whenever, मृगयाम् for hunting, याति goes, तदा then, स: Lakshmana, धनु: परिपालयन् holding bow in his hand, एनम् him    (Rama), पृष्ठत: behind, अन्वेति followed.
1::18::27::लक्ष्मणावरज: younger brother of Lakshmana, स: शत्रुघ्न: that Satrughna, भरतस्यापि for Bharata also, नित्यम् always, प्राणै: (more than his) life, प्रियतर: was  dearer, तस्य च आसीत्  for Satrughna also, तथा in that manner, प्रिय: became dear( to Bharata).
1::18::28::स: दशरथ: Dasaratha, महाभागै: by the very fortunate ones, चतुर्भि: four, पुत्रै: by sons, पितामह: Brahma, देवै: इव like devatas, परमप्रीत: बभूव was highly pleased.
1::18::29::ते they, यदा when, ज्ञानसम्पन्ना: were enriched with knowledge, सर्वैः गुणै: by all virtues, समुदिता: united, ह्रीमन्त: modest, कीर्तिमन्तश्च renowned, सर्वज्ञा: knower of all things, दीर्घदर्शिन: farsighted, एवं in this manner, प्रभावानाम्  having such faculties, दीप्ततेजसाम् of the men of shining glory, तेषां सर्वेषाम् in their matter, पिता दशरथ: father Dasaratha, लोकाधिप: lord of the worlds, ब्रह्मा यथा like Brahma, हृष्ट: rejoiced.
1::18::30::ते they, मनुजव्याघ्रा अपि also tigers among men, वैदिकाध्ययने in the study of vedas, रता: were engaged, पितृशुश्रूषणरता: intent on doing service to their parents, धनुर्वेदे in the archery also, निष्ठिता: were proficient.
1::18::31::अथ thereafter, धर्मात्मा the virtuous, राजा दशरथ: king Dasaratha, सोपाध्याय: along with priests, सबान्धव: along with relatives, तेषाम् their, दारक्रियां प्रति marriage, चिन्तयामास was engaged in the thought .
1::18::32::महात्मन: of the noble minded, तस्य king Dasaratha, मन्त्रिमध्ये in the midst of counsellors, चिन्तयमानस्य while he was thinking, महातेजा: highly illustrious king, विश्वामित्र: महामुनि: ascetic Viswamitra, अभ्यगच्छत् arrived.
1::18::33::स: he, राज्ञ: king's, दर्शनाकाङ्क्षी desirous of seeing, द्वाराध्यक्षान् door keepers, उवाच ह addressed saying, गाधिन: Gadhi's, सुतम् son, कौशिकम् born in the line of Kusika, माम् me, प्राप्तम् having arrived, शीघ्रम् speedily, आख्यात declare.
1::18::34::तत् वचनम् those words, श्रुत्वा having heard, सर्वे all of them, सम्भ्रान्तमनस: with excited minds, तेन वाक्येन by that statement, चोदिता: prompted, राज्ञ: king's, वेश्म apartment, त्रासात् due to fear, प्रदुद्रुवुः hastened.
1::18::35::तदा then, ते they, राजभवनम् towards royal palace, गत्वा having gone, तदा then, विश्वामित्रम् ऋषिम् maharshi Viswamitra, प्राप्तम् having come, ऐक्ष्वाकवे to the king belonging to Ikshvaku race, नृपाय to king Dasaratha, आवेदयामासु: communicated.
1::18::36::तेषाम् theirs, तत् वचनम् those words, श्रुत्वा having heard, हृष्ट: immensely pleased, सपुरोधा: together with his preceptors, समाहित: with absorbed mind, तम् him, वासव: Indra, ब्रह्माणमिव like Brahma, प्रत्युज्जगाम went forth to receive him.
1::18::37::तत: then, राजा king, ज्वलितम् shining, दीप्त्या with radiance, तापसं ascetic, संशितव्रतम् who had fulfilled his vows, तम् him, दृष्ट्वा having seen, प्रहृष्टवदन: with cheerful countenance,        अर्घ्यम् respectable offerings, उपहारयत् offered.
1::18::38::स: he, शास्त्रदृष्टेन as shown in the scriptures, कर्मणा by religious rites, राज्ञ: of the king, अर्घ्यम् offerings, प्रतिगृह्य having received, नराधिपम् king, कुशलं च welfare of the kingdom, अव्ययं prosperity, पर्यपृच्छत् enquired.
1::18::39::सुधार्मिक: exceedingly virtuous, कौशिक: Viswamitra, राज्ञ: King's, पुरे in the cities, कोशे in treasury, जनपदे in the villages, बान्धवेषु among relatives, सुहृत्सु च among friends, कुशलम् welfare, पर्यपृच्छत् enquired.
1::18::40::सामन्ता: tributary kings, सर्वे all, ते to you, अपि सन्नता: are they submissive, रिपव: enemies, जिता: are conquered, ते to you, दैवतं कर्म rites for propitiating gods, मानुषं चापि service to humanity, साधु rightly, अनुष्ठितम् performed. 
1::18::41::मुनिपुङ्गव: the foremost of ascetis,Viswamitra, वसिष्ठं च  Vasistha also, तान् महाभागान् all those distinguished men, ऋषींश्च sages also, यथान्यायम् according to customary protocol, समागम्य having approached, कुशलम् welfare, उवाच spoke (enquired).
1::18::42::सर्वे all of them, हृष्टमनस: with gladdened hearts, तस्य राज्ञ: that king's, निवेशनम् royal palace, विविशु: entered, तत्र there, यथार्हत: according to their statusmerit, पूजिता: having been honoured, निषेदुश्च sat down.
1::18::43::अथ thereafter, परमोदार: highly generous, राजा king Dasaratha, हृष्टमना: wellpleased, तम् महामुनिम् that great sage, विश्वामित्रम् Visvamitra, अभिपूजयन् while  worshipping, हृष्ट: with joy, उवाच spoke৷৷
1::18::44::महामुने O Great sage, अमृतस्य nectar's, सम्प्राप्ति: obtaining, यथा like, अनूदके in a parched land वर्षम् rain, यथा like, अप्रजस्य for a man without progeny, सदृशदारेषु through his worthy wife, पुत्रजन्म birth of sons, यथा like, प्रणष्टस्य for one who lost wealth, लाभः recoveryof, यथा like, महोदये in a great achievement, हर्ष: joy, यथा like, ते आगमनम् your arrival, तथा एव similar to that, मन्ये I am considering, स्वागतम् welcome to you,
1::18::45::पूर्वम् formerly, राजर्षिशब्देन by the word of 'Rajarshi', द्योतितप्रभ: indicating your shining (power), अनु thereafter, तपसा by austerities, ब्रह्मर्षित्वम् status of Brahmarshi, प्राप्त: (you have) obtained, मया by me, बहुधा in several ways, पूज्य:असि you are worthy of worship.
1::18::46::ब्रह्मन् O Brahman, तत् therefore  इदम् this l, अद्भुतम् wonderful, मम to me, परमम् great, पवित्रम् pure, प्रभो O Lord, तव your, सन्दर्शनात् by the presence, अहम् I, शुभक्षेत्रगतश्च have acquired merits of pilgrimage .
1::18::47::आगमनं प्रति in coming here, तुभ्यम् to you, प्रार्थितम् desired, यत् कार्यम् the purpose, ब्रूहि tell me, अहम् I, अनुगृहीत: am favoured, त्वदर्थपरिवृद्धये to achieve your object, इच्छामि I am desirous.
1::18::48::कौशिक O Visvamitra, कार्यस्य of the work, विमर्शम् hesitation, गन्तुम् न अर्हसि you ought not get, अहम् I, विशेषेण specially, कर्ता च I shall accomplish that act, भवान् you, मम for me, दैवतं हि are a god.
1::18::49::द्विज O Brahmin, मम for me, अयम् this, महान् great, अभ्युदय: prosperity, अनुप्राप्त: has come, मम for me, तव आगमनज: in consequence of your coming here, कृत्स्न: entire, धर्म: excellent merit, अनुत्तम: great. 
1::18::50::आत्मवता by the  wise and prudent, Dasaratha, इति in this manner, विनीतम् in a  humble way, उक्तम् spoken, हृदयसुखम् comfortable to the mind, श्रुतिसुखम् pleasant to the ears, वाक्यम् words, निशम्य having heard, प्रथितगुणयशा: with celebrated qualities and fame, गुणै: by  virtues, र्विशिष्ट: distinguished, परमऋषि: excellent rishi, परमम् great, हर्षम् जगाम experinced delight.
1::18::51::
