1::12::1::After a long time, at the advent of charming spring a desire arose in the mind of the king (Dasaratha) to perform the sacrifice.
1::12::2::Then bowing his head in respect to that brahmin who was effulgent like a celestial  and having won his grace he chose him to conduct a sacrifice for a son for (the continuity of) his dynasty.
1::12::3::The wellhonoured brahmin agreed, saying, Be it so, let the requisite materials be procured and the sacificial horse, released.
1::12::4::Thereafter the king said to Sumantra, Summon immediately, Suyajna, Vamadeva, Jabali and Kasyapa, family priest Vasishta and other foremost and learned brahmins who are the official priests wellversed in the Vedas.
1::12::5::Then Sumantra, a man of smart movement went immediately and brought all those brahmins who were wellversed in the Vedas.
1::12::6::After paying respect to them (learned brahmins), virtuous king Dasaratha graciously uttered these words charged with dharma and artha.
1::12::7::There is no happiness for me. I am overwhelmed with grief as I have no son. Therefore, I intend to perform a horsesacrifice.
1::12::8::I wish to perform the yaga acording to scriptural procedures. And I will have my desire fulfilled by the grace of the sage (Rsyasringa).
1::12::9::When they heard these words from the king's month, those brahmins heades by Vasishta extolled the king's decision exclaiming, wellsaid:
1::12::10::The priests led by Rsyasringa replied to the king, saying, Let the sacrificial articles be procured and your sacrificial horse released. 
1::12::11::Since this righteous thought for begetting children has entered your mind, you shall surely get four sons of immense prowess.  
1::12::12::Pleased to hear the brahmins' words, the king happily addressed his ministers with auspicious words:
1::12::13::In accordance with the instructions by my spiritual preceptors let the articles (required for performing the sacrifice) be procured and the horse  released under the protection of warriors accompanied by the chief priest.
1::12::14:: Let a sacrificial pavillion be constructed on the northern bank of Sarayu according to prescribed methods ordained in the 'kalpa' and other scriptures for the uninterrupted completion of the sacrifice.
1::12::15::If in this best of sacrifices aswamedha, obstructions and omissions do not occur it will be possible for the king to get the results.
1::12::16::The learned brahmarakshasas always look out for flaws in the sacrifice so that they can strike into it. If the sacrifice is damaged, the doer of the sacrifice will be immediately destroyed.
1::12::17::Therefore let the arrangements be made in a manner by which this sacifice is completed in accordance with the prescriptions in scriptures and you are experts in doing so.
1::12::18::Honouring the words of the king, all the ministers did as ordered.
1::12::19::Admiring the great king, the knower of righteousness, the brahmins permitted by him  returned to their places as they had some.
1::12::20::When the great brahmins  departed, the glorious king (Dasaratha) sent away his ministers and entered his palace. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे द्वादशस्सर्ग:।।2Thus ends the twelfth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
