1::69::1::सोपाध्याय: accompanied by spiritual preceptors, सबान्धव: relations, राजा दशरथ: king Dasaratha, हृष्ट: highly pleased, तत: afterwards, रात्र्याम् when the night, व्यतीतायाम् had passed, सुमन्त्रम् addressing Sumantra, इदम् this word, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::69::2::अद्य today, सर्वे all, धनाध्यक्षा: officers of the treasury, पुष्कलम् abundance of, धनम् wealth, आदाय taking, नानारत्नसमन्विता: furnished with a variety gems, सुविहिता: wellprepared, अग्रे in advance, व्रजन्तु may go.
1::69::3::मम my, अज्ञासमकालम् at command itself, चतुरङ्गबलम् four divisions of the army, सर्वश: from all the four quarters, निर्यातु many depart, अनुत्तमम् excelent, यानयुग्यम् also chariots, palanquins (march out).
1::69::4::वसिष्ठ: Vasishta, वामदेवश्च Vamadeva, अथ also, जाबालि: Jabali, काश्यप: Kasyapa, दीर्घायु: endowed with long life, मार्कण्डेयश्च Markandeya, तथा also, ऋषि: कात्यायन: rishi Katyayana, एते these, द्विजा: brahmins, अग्रे in advance, प्रयान्तु will go, मे my, स्यन्दनम् chariot, योजयस्व be yoked, कालात्यय passage of time, यथा as, न स्यात् will not happen, दूता: messengers, माम् me, त्वरयन्ति हि are hastening me up.  
1::69::5::नरेन्द्रस्य of Indra among kings, Dasaratha's, वचनात् by the command, चतुरङ्गिणी having four divisions, सा that, सेना army, ऋषिभि: with sages, व्रजन्तम् while going, राजानम् king Dasaratha, पृष्ठत: behind, अन्वगात् followed.
1::69::6::चतुरहम् to be covered in four days, मार्गम् that path, गत्वा having passed, विदेहान् country of Videhas, अभ्युपेयिवान् arrived, राजा king, श्रीमान् the auspicious, जनक: Janaka, श्रुत्वा having heard, पूजाम् reverential hospitality, अकल्पयत् made.
1::69::7::तत: afterwards, राजा King, मुदित: immensely pleased, जनक: Janaka, नृपम् ruler of men, राजानम् king, वृद्धम् aged, दशरथम् Dasaratha, आसाद्य having approached, परमम् great, हर्षम् delight, ययौ obtained.
1::69::8::नरश्रेष्ठ: best of men, मुदा with joy, अन्वित: filled, नरश्रेष्ठम् addressing the best of men Dasaratha, उवाच spoke, राघव O Descendant of Raghu, महाराज O Great king Dasaratha, ते to you, स्वागतम् welcome, दिष्ट्या fortunately, प्राप्त: असि you have come, उभयो: of the  two, पुत्रयो: sons', वीर्यनिर्जिताम् won through prowess, प्रीतिम् pleasure, लप्स्यसे you will experience.       
1::69::9::महातेजा: highly lustrous, भगवान् adorable, ऋषि: ascetic Vasishta, सर्वै: all, द्विजश्रेष्ठै: (सह) with foremost of brahmins, देवै: with devatas, शतक्रतुरिव like Indra, दिष्ट्या by the grace of god, प्राप्त: has come here.
1::69::10::वीर्यश्रेष्ठै: by the men who are distinguished because of prowess, महात्मभि: by the great, राघवै: सह along with Raghus, संबन्धात् through the alliance, दिष्ट्या मे by heaven's grace, मे विघ्ना: my impediments, निर्जिता: have been overcome, दिष्ट्या by the grace of god, कुलम् race, पूजितम् honoured.   
1::69::11::नरश्रेष्ठ O Foremost of men, नरेन्द्रेन्द्र O Best of kings, श्व: tomorrow, प्रभाते at dawn, यज्ञस्य sacrifice's, अन्ते completion of, ऋषिसम्मतम् worthy of approval by sages, विवाहम् marriage, (आर्षविवाह) निर्वर्तयितुम् to perform, अर्हसि it behoves of you. 
1::69::12::वाक्यविदाम् among the knowledgeable men in words, श्रेष्ठः (वर:) excellent, नराधिप: king, तस्य his, तत् वचनम् those words, श्रुत्वा having heard, ऋषिमध्ये amidst sages, महीपतिम् addressing the king, वाक्यम् words, प्रत्युवाच replied.
1::69::13::प्रतिग्रह: acceptance of a gift, दातृवश: as it may please the giver, एतत् this one, पुरा formerly, मया by me, श्रुतम् heard, धर्मज्ञ O Knower of righteousness, यथा whatever, वक्ष्यसि you may say, तत् that, वयम् we, करिष्यामहे will perform.
1::69::14::सत्यवादिन: truth speaking Dasaratha's, धर्मिष्ठम् च conforming to morality, यशस्यं च conducive to fame, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा having listened, विदेहाधिपति: Janaka, परम् extreme, विस्मयम् admiration, आगत: filled with.
1::69::15::तत: afterwards, सर्वे all, मुनिगणा: hosts of sages, परस्परसमागमे in each other's company, महता by great, हर्षेण delight, युक्ता: filled with, ताम् that, निशाम् night, सुखम् comfortably, अवसन् lived.
1::69::16::राजा king Dasaratha, पुत्रौ sons, राघवौ Rama and Lakshmana, निशाम्य on beholding them, परिहर्षित: experienced supreme satisfaction, जनकेन by Janaka, सुपूजित: wellhonoured, परमप्रीत: greatly delighted, उवास lived.
1::69::17::महातेजा: highly splendrous, तत्त्ववित् knower of prescibed duty and conduct, जनकोऽपि Janaka also, यज्ञस्य of sacrifice, सुताभ्यां च for both of his daughters, क्रियाम् acts, कृत्वा having made, रात्रिम् night, उवास ह lived.
