1::42::1::राम O Rama, सगरे when king Sagara, कालधर्मम् duty of nature, death, गते obtained, प्रकृतीजना: ministers and subjects, सुधार्मिकम् highly virtuous, अंशुमन्तम् Anshuman, राजानम् as king, रोचयामासु: accepted.
1::42::2::रघुनन्दन O Descendent of Raghu, Rama, स: अंशुमान् that Anshuman, सुमहान् very great, राजा आसीत् was a monarch, तस्य for him, दिलीप इति by name Dilipa, विश्रुत: celebrated, महान् great, पुत्र: आसीत् a son was born.
1::42::3::रघुनन्दन O Rama, तस्मिन् दिलीपे in that Dilipa, राज्यम् kingdom, समावेश्य vesting, पुण्ये pious, हिमवच्छिखरे on the peak of Himavat mountain, सुदारुणम् rigid, तप: penance, तेपे he  performed.
1::42::4::राम O Rama, सुमहायशा: highly renowned Anshuman, द्वात्रिंशत् सहस्राणि thirty two  thousand,  वर्षाणि years, तपोवनं गत: having reached tapovana, तपोधन: one who had asceticism as wealth, स्वर्गम् heaven, लेभे attained.
1::42::5::महातेजा: exceedingly lustrous, दिलीपस्तु Dilipa on his part, पैतामहम् relating to his grandfathers, वधम् killing, श्रुत्वा having heard, दु:खोपहतया overtaken by grief, बुद्ध्या with his intellect, निश्चयम् conclusion, नाध्यगच्छत did not arrive at. 
1::42::6::गङ्गावतरणम् descent of Ganga, कथम् how to do?, तेषाम् their, जलक्रिया funeral rites with water, कथम् how to do?, एतान् them, कथम् how to, तारयेयम् इति (help them to cross the wordly sea of suffering and reach heaven) liberate, चिन्तापर: thoughtful, अभूत् became.
1::42::7::विदितात्मन: wellknown for his intelligence, धर्मेण with righteousness, नित्यम् constantly, चिन्तयत: while reflecting, तस्य for him, भगीरथो नाम named Bhagiratha, परमधार्मिक: highly virtuous, पुत्र: son, जज्ञे was born.
1::42::8::महातेजा: most brilliant, दिलीपस्तु Dilipa on his part, बहुभि: by any, यज्ञै: sacrifices, इष्टवान्  performed, राजा king, त्रिंशद्वर्षसहस्राणि thirty thousand years, राज्यम् kingdom, अकारयत् ruled.  
1::42::9::नरशार्दूल O Tiger among men, राजा king Dilipa, तेषाम् their, उद्धरणं प्रति about salvation, निश्चयम् conclusion, अगत्वा not able to arrive, व्याधिना by suffering illness, कालधर्मम् death, उपेयिवान् effected.
1::42::10::नरर्षभ: the best among men, राजा king Dilipa, पुत्रम् son, भगीरथम् Bhagiratha, राज्ये in the kingdom, अभिषिच्य having conducted coronation, स्वार्जितेनैव with selfearned, कर्मणा एव  acts only, इन्द्रलोकम् towards the region of Indra, गत: had gone.
1::42::11::रघुनन्दन O Rama, धार्मिक: righteous one, महातेजा: highly lustrous, राजर्षि: royal sage, भगीरथस्तु Bhagiratha, अनपत्य: without sons, स: he, प्रजाकाम: desirous of progeny, अप्रजा: did not beget children.
1::42::12::रघुनन्दन O Rama, स: he, गङ्गावतरणे for the descent of Ganga, रत: keenly desiring, तद्राज्यम् that kingdom, मन्त्रिषु in his ministers, आधाय after entrusting, ऊर्ध्वबाहु: with arms held upwards, पञ्चतपा: surrounded by four fires in the hot season and standing under the sun, the fifth fire, मासाहार: partaking food once a month, जितेन्द्रिय: with his senses controlled, गोकर्णे at the sacred spot, Gokarna, दीर्घम् for long years, तप: yogic penance, आतिष्ठत् practised.  
1::42::13::महाबाहो O Mighty armed Rama, तस्य while he was, घोरे तपसि amidst rigid austerities, तिष्ठत: while he was determined to carry on, वर्षसहस्राणि thousands of years, अतीतानि passed away, प्रजानाम् for all men, पति: lord, ईश्वर: lord, भगवान् ब्रह्मा god Brahma, तस्य his, महात्मन: illustrious, राज्ञ: for king, सुप्रीत: was highly pleased. 
1::42::14::तत: thereafter, पितामह: grandsire, सुरगणै: with groups of devatas, उपागम्य having arrived, अथ thereafter, तप्यमानम् engaged in austerities, महात्मानम् illustrious, भगीरथम् Bhagiratha, अब्रवीत् said. 
1::42::15::महाभाग O Highly distinguished one, जनेश्वर O Mighty monarch, भगीरथ O Bhagiratha, ते  by you, सुतप्तेन by properly disciplined, तपसा austerities, अहम् I, प्रीत: pleased, सुव्रत O You of excellent vows, वरम् boon, वरय ask for.
1::42::16::महातेजा: most brilliant one, महाभाग: highly glorious, भगीरथः Bhagiratha, कृताञ्जलि: with folded palms, उपस्थित: having approached, तं सर्वलोकपितामहम् grandsire for all the worlds, उवाच spoke.     
1::42::17::भगवन् O Adorable one, मे with me, प्रीत: यदि if you are pleased, तपस: of austerities, फलम् अस्ति यदि if worthy reward is possible, सगरस्य king Sagara's, आत्मजा: sons, सर्वे all, मत्त: from me, सलिलम् funeral rites with water, आप्नुयु: may receive.
1::42::18::एषाम् these, महात्मनाम् eminent ones, भस्मनि in ashes, गङ्गाया: Ganga's, सलिलक्लिन्ने immersed by the waters, मे my, सर्वे all, प्रपितामहा: uncles of my grand father, अत्यन्तम् ultimately, स्वर्गम् towards heaven, गच्छेयु: may go.
1::42::19::देव O Divine lord, इक्ष्वाकूणाम् for Ikshvakus, कुले in the dynasty, सन्तति: progeny, देया should be bestowed, न: our, कुलम् race, नावसीदेत् let it not be terminated, एष: this, मे  my, पर: another, वर: अस्तु let it be a boon. 
1::42::20::सर्वलोकपितामह: grandsire for all the worlds, उक्तवाक्यम् him who has spoken these words, राजानम् addressing the king, शुभाम् auspicious, मधुराम् sweet, मधुराक्षराम् with agreeable letters, वाणीम् words, प्रत्युवाच replied.
1::42::21::महारथ O Great charioteer, भगीरथ Bhagiratha, एष: this, मनोरथ desire, महान् great, इक्ष्वाकु कुलवर्धन perpetuator of dynasty of Ikshvaku, एवम् in this way, भवतु may happen, ते भद्रम् prosperity to you. 
1::42::22::हैमवती Haimavati, the daughter of Himavat, इयम् this, गङ्गा Ganga, हिमवत: Himavat's, ज्येष्ठा सुता eldest daughter, ताम् her, धारयितुम् to hold, शक्त: capable, हर: lord Shiva, तत्र there, नियुज्यताम् may be entreated.
1::42::23::राजन् O King, गङ्गाया: Ganga's, पतनम् descent, पृथिवी earth, न सहिष्यति cannot sustain, वीर O Hero, ताम् her, धारयितुम् to hold, शूलिन: other than Siva, the wielder of trident, अन्यम् any other person, न पश्यामि I do not see.
1::42::24::लोककृत् (देवः) the creator of the worlds, तं राजानम् addressing that king, एवम् in this way, उक्त्वा having spoken, गङ्गां च Ganga also, आभाष्य after conversing, सह देवै: along with  devatas, मरुद्गणै: with groups of maruts, त्रिदिवम् towards heaven, जगाम had gone. 
