1::41::1::O Delight of the Raghus, king Sagara, realising that his sons had left long ago  said to his grandson Anshuman resplendent with his own lustre: 
1::41::2:: 'You are valiant. You have acquired knowledge (in various fields). You are illustrious like  your ancestors. Pursue the track taken by your uncles and by the thief who ran away with the horse'. 
1::41::3::'Creatures in the depths of the earth are powerful and mighty. Carry with you a bow and weapons to counter their attack'.
1::41::4::'Honour those who deserve it. Kill those who cause obstacles to sacrifice. Come back with your mission accomplishing. And ensure the (successful) completion of my  sacrifice'.
1::41::5:: Having been throughly instructed by the highsouled Sagara in this way, Anshuman  left with rapid strides carrying a scimitar and a bow.
1::41::6::O Best among men directed by the king (Sagara), Anshuman followed the path taken by his noble uncles into the depths of the earth.
1::41::7::Exceedingly valiant Ashuman beheld the elephant of the quarter worshipped by daityas, danavas, rakshasas, pisachas, birds and serpents.
1::41::8:: Having circumambulated the elephant, he (Anshuman) enquired about his wellbeing, the where abouts of his uncles and also about the one who had stolen the sacrificial horse.
1::41::9:: Having listened to the words of Anshuman the elephant of the quarter replied, 'O Anshuman, son of Asamanjasa having fulfilled your objective, you will go back soon with the horse'.
1::41::10::Having listened to the words of the elephant, Anshuman started enquring the well being of each of the guardians (elephants) of the quarters successively with due respect:
1::41::11:: All those elephants of the quarters were knowers of the essence of words and proficient in the right use of words. Treating him kindly the elephants encouraged him saying, 'You will go back with the horse'. 
1::41::12::Hearing their words with a quick pace where he reached the place his uncles, sons of Sagara were reduced to heaps of ashes.
1::41::13:: Then the son of Asamanjasa, overwhelmed with sorrow and deeply distressed at their destruction, bewailed with great grief.
1::41::14::Possessed by grief and tears, Anshuman, that tiger among men, beheld the sacrificial horse grazing nearby.
1::41::15::With the intention of performing traditional funeral rites with water for the deceased princes, highly lustrous Anshuman looked around for water but could not see any reservoir of water (in the neighbourhood).
1::41::16::O Rama with his keen eyes, he (Anshuman) marked Suparna, the maternal uncle of his uncles, lord of the eagles (Garuda) bestowed with the swiftness of the wind.
1::41::17::Highly powerful Garuda, son of Vinata, addressing Anshuman said 'O Tiger among men do not grieve. This act of assasination is meant for the welfare of the three worlds'.
1::41::18:: 'Your valiant uncles have been burnt by Kapila of boundless power. O Sagcious one performing traditional rites with ordinary water is not proper'.
1::41::19:: 'O Best among men O Mightyarmed one perform  the traditional rites of your uncles with water from river Ganga, the eldest daughter of Himavat'.
1::41::20::Ganga, the purifier of the three worlds, will sanctify your uncles reduced to heaps of ashes. These heaps when inundated by waters of Ganga, beloved of the worlds, will take  all the sixty thousand sons to heaven.
1::41::21::'O Highly fortunate one O Best among men go back with that horse. O Hero It behoves of you to complete the sacrifice undertaken by  your grandfather'.
1::41::22::Exceedingly powerful and highly renowned Anshuman, on hearing the words of Garuda returned quickly to the capital with the horse৷৷ 
1::41::23:: O Descendant of the Raghus (Rama), having reached the king who had been initiated into the ceremony, Anshuman communicated faithfully to him all that had happened. He also reported the words Suparna had said.
1::41::24::The king heard (was stunned to hear) the awful words of Anshuman, (yet) he performed the sacrifice in accordance with traditional scriptures and Kalpa, the Vedanga.
1::41::25::The great lord of the earth (king Sagara) after performing the sacrifice reached his capital. (But) He could not devise any means to bring Ganga down to the earth. 
1::41::26::The mighty king (Sagara), over a long period of time without being able to devise means (to bring Ganga down to the earth), ruled the kingdom for thirty thousand years and ascended to heaven. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकचत्वारिंशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the fortyfirst sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
