1::43::1::राम O Rama, तस्मिन् देवदेवे when that god of gods, Brahma, गते had departed, स: he, वसुमतीम् earth, अङ्गुष्ठाग्रनिपीडिताम् pressing with the tip of his great toe, कृत्वा having made, संवत्सरम् for one year, उपासत meditated upon.
1::43::2::अथ thereafter, संवत्सरे when one year, पूर्णे was completed, सर्वलोकनमस्कृत: he, worshipped by all in all worlds, उमापति: husband of Uma, पशुपति: Iswara, राजानम् addressing king, इदम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
1::43::3::नरश्रेष्ठ O Best among men, अहम् I, ते with you, प्रीत: pleased, तव to you, प्रियम् dear,  करिष्यामि I shall do, अहम् I, शैलराजसुताम् daughter of the king of mountains, शिरसा with my head, धारयिष्यामि will hold.
1::43::4::राम O Rama, तत: thereafter, हैमवती daughter of Himvat, सर्वलोकनमस्कृता adored by all worlds, ज्येष्ठा  eldest (गङ्गा Ganga), तदा then, अति महत् mighty, रूपं form, दस्सहम् unbearable, वेगं speed, कृत्वा having assumed, आकाशात् from the sky, शिवे on the auspicious, शिवशिरसि on the head of Siva, अपतत् उत fell down. 
1::43::5::परमदुर्धरा extremely difficult to contain, सा देवी that goddess, गङ्गा Ganga, अचिन्तयच्च also thought over, अहम् I, स्रोतसा by my flow, शङ्करम् Siva, गृह्य seizing, पातालम् lower regions of earth, विशामि I shall enter.
1::43::6::त्रिनयन: threeeyed, भगवान् worshipful, हर: Iswara, तस्या: her, अवलेपनम् proud intentions, ज्ञात्वा having come to know, तदा then, तिरोभावयितुम् to send her back,  बुद्धिम् determination, चक्रे made.
1::43::7::राम O Rama, सा पुण्या that sacred river Ganga, हिमवत्प्रतिमे resembling Himavat mountain, जटामण्डलगह्वरे cave of the locks of hair, तस्मिन् on that, रुद्रस्य Siva's, पुण्ये sacred, मूर्धनि head, पतिता fell.
1::43::8::सा that Ganga, यत्नम् effort, आस्थिता having put in, कथञ्चित् by any means, महीम् earth, गन्तुम् to reach, न अशक्नोत् was not poweful, जटामण्डलमोहिता enveloped by matted locks of hair, निर्गमनम् exit, न लेभे did not obtain. 
1::43::9::देवी Ganga, बहून् many, संवत्सरगणान् for a number of years, तत्रैव there alone, अबम्भ्रमत् went round and round, ताम् that Ganga, अपश्यन् without seeing, पुन: again, तत्र there, परमम् great, तप: austerities, आस्थित: adopted.
1::43::10::रघुनन्दन O Rama, अनेन by this penance, हर: Iswara, अत्यर्थम् immensely, तोषित: अभूत् was gratified, तत: afterwards, गङ्गाम् Ganga, बिन्दुसर: प्रति forming Bindusara, विससर्ज released (drop by drop).
1::43::11::तस्याम् when that Ganga, विसृज्यमानायाम् was being released, सप्त seven, स्रोतांसि streams, जज्ञिरे were born, ह्लादिनी Hladini, पावनी Pavani, तथा and, अपरा another, नलिनी च Nalini,  शिवजला: possessing auspicious waters, तिस्र: three, शुभा: auspicious, गङ्गा: streams of Ganga, प्राचीम् दिशं eastwards, जग्मु: had flowed. 
1::43::12::सुचक्षु: Suchakshu, सीता च Sita, सिन्धु: called Sindhu, महानदी च a great river, शुभोदका: having auspicious waters, एता: तिस्र: these three, प्रतीचीं दिशम् westwards, जग्मु: had gone
1::43::13::अथः downwards, तासाम् among them, सप्तमी seventh, भगीरथम् Bhagiratha, नृपम् king, अन्वगात् followed, महातेजाः most brilliant, राजर्षि: royal sage, भगीरथोऽपि Bhagiratha also,  दिव्यम् divine, स्यन्दनम् chariot, आस्थित: mounting, अग्रे प्रायात् marched forward, गङ्गा च Ganga, अनुव्रजत् followed.
1::43::14::गगनात् from sky, शङ्करशिर: on the head of Shankara, तत: from there, धरणिम् earth, आश्रिता resorted, तत्र there, जलम् waters, तीव्रशब्दपुरस्कृतम् culminating in intense sounds, व्यसर्पत had flown.
1::43::15::तदा then, वसुन्धरा earth, पतितै: by the fallen, पतद्भिश्च by the falling, मत्स्यकच्छपसङ्घैश्च by shoals of fish, turtles, शिंशुमारगणैश्च by multitudes of sea animals, अन्यै: by other  animals, व्यरोचत shone. 
1::43::16::तत: then, देवर्षिगन्धर्वा: devarshis, gandharvas, यक्ष: yakshas, ते सिद्धगणा: those hosts of siddhas, तदा then, तथा in that way, गगनात् from the sky, गाम् the earth, गताम् reached, व्यलोकयन्त looked on with astonishment.
1::43::17::तदा then, देवता: devatas, नगराकारै: as large as cities, विमानै: aerial chariots, पारिप्लवगतै: in restless movements, हयै: by horses, गजवरै: by excellent elephants, तत्र there, विष्ठिता: were stationed.
1::43::18::लोके In this world, अद्भुततमं most wonderful, उत्तमम् great, गङ्गापतनम् descent of Ganga, दिदृक्षव: desirous of witnessing, अमितौजस: beings with great lustre, देवगणा: hosts of devatas, समीयु: arrived.
1::43::19::गततोयदम् devoid of clouds, गगनम् sky, सम्पतद्भि: by those arriving with speed, सुरगणै: by  multitudes of devatas, तेषाम् आभरणौजसा with the effulgence of their ornaments, शतादित्यमिव hundred suns, आभाति shines (at that moment).
1::43::20::तदा then, शिंशुमारोरगगणै: by multitudes of sea animals and serpents, चञ्चलै: which had fickle movements, मीनैरपि च with the fish also, आकाशम् the sky, विद्युद्भिः with flashes of lightening, विक्षिप्तमिव as if scattered, अभवत् became.
1::43::21::सहस्रधा in thousand ways, कीर्यमाणै: scattered, पाण्डरै: by the white, सलिलोत्पीडै: foams of water, गगनम् sky, हंससम्प्लवै: with flocks of swans, शारदाभ्रै: by autumnal clouds, अकीर्णमिव  as if spread over.
1::43::22::क्वचित् at some places, द्रुततरम् very rapidly, याति it was flowing, क्वचित् at some other  places, कुटिलम् याति flowing in curved ways, क्वचित् at some other places, आयतम् it was wide, क्वचित् at some places, विनतम् inclined, क्वचित् at some places, उध्दूतम् was rising  high, क्वचित् at some places, शनै: शनै: very slowly, याति flowing.
1::43::23::क्वचित् at some places, सलिलम् water, सलिलेनैव with waters alone, अभ्याहतम् was dashing  against, मुहु: repeatedly, ऊर्ध्वमुखम् upwards, गत्वा having gone, पुन: again, वसुधातलम् on the ground, पपात fell down.
1::43::24::शङ्करशिरोभ्रष्टम् descended on the Shankara's head, पुन: again, भूमितले on the earth, भ्रष्टम्  fallen, गतकल्मषम् freed from impurities, निर्मलम् pure, तत् तोयम् those waters, तदा then, व्यरोचत looked splendid.
1::43::25::तत्र there, देवर्षिगन्धर्वा: devatas, rishis and gandharvas, वसुधातलवसिन: those living on the earth, भवाङ्गपतितम् fallen from the body of Siva, तोयम् waters, पवित्रमिति sacred, पस्पृशु: touched.
1::43::26::ये च those, शापात् due to the curse, गगनात् from the sky,  वसुधातलम् earth, प्रपतिता: had fallen, ते they, तत्र there, अभिषेकम् bath, कृत्वा having taken, गतकल्मषा: बभूवु: were absolved  of their sins.
1::43::27::तेन by that, सुभास्वता excellently shining, तोयेन waters, धूतपापा: cleansed of their sins, पुन: again, आकाशम् sky, आविश्य having entered, अथ thereafter, पुन: again, स्वान् their own, लोकान् celestial worlds, प्रतिपेदिरे attained.
1::43::28::लोक: people, भास्वता by the shining, तेन that, तोयेन by waters, मुमुदे rejoiced, मुदित: pleased, गङ्गायाम् in that Ganga, कृताभिषेक: having performed bath, विगतक्लम: बभूव were  removed of fatigue.
1::43::29::महातेजा: most brilliant, राजर्षि: royal sage, भगीरथोऽपि Bhagiratha also, दिव्यम् divine, स्यन्दनम् chariot, आस्थित: mounting, अग्रे प्रायात् marched forward, गङ्गा च Ganga, तम् him, पृष्ठत: from behind, अन्वगात् followed.
1::43::30::राम O Rama, सर्षिगणा: with hosts of Saints, देवा: devatas, सर्वे all, दैत्यदानवराक्षसा: daityas, danavas, rakshasas, सकिन्नरमहोरगा: with kinnaras, serpents, गन्धर्वयक्षप्रवरा: foremost of gandharvas, yakshas, सर्वा: all, अप्सरस: apsaras, भगीरथरथानुगाम् following the chariot of Bhagiratha, गङ्गाम् Ganga, अन्वगमन् followed, ये जलचराश्च those acquatic creatures, सर्वे all (followed ).
1::43::31::राजा king, भगीरथ: Bhagiratha, यत: wherever, यशस्विनी renowned, सरितां श्रेष्ठा foremost of rivers, सर्वपापप्रणाशिनी destroyer of all sins, गङ्गा Ganga, तत: in the same direction, जगाम  flowed.
1::43::32::तत: subsequently, गङ्गा Ganga, यजमानस्य of the performer of sacrifice, अद्भुतकर्मण: of great deeds, महात्मन: of the eminent, जह्नो: of sage Jahnu, यज्ञवाटम् sacrificial ground, सम्प्लावयामास inundated.    
1::43::33::राघव O Rama, यज्वा the performer of  the sacrifice, sage Jahnu, तस्या: her, अवलेपनम् pride, ज्ञात्वा having known, क्रुध्द: furious with anger, गङ्गाया: Ganga's, सर्वम् entire, जलम् waters, परमाद्भुतम् astonishingly, अपिबत् drank.
1::43::34::तत: afterwards, सगन्धर्वा: along with gandharvas, देवा: devatas, ऋषयश्च rishis, सुविस्मिता: highly amazed, पुरुषसत्तमम् best amog men, महात्मानम् eminent, जह्नुम् sage Jahnu, पूजयन्ति worshipped, गङ्गां च Ganga also, महात्मन: illustrious Juhnu's, दुहितृत्वे as daughter, नयन्ति considered. 
1::43::35::तत: thence, तुष्ट: highly pleased, महातेजा: highly lustrous Jahnu, पुन: again, श्रोत्राभ्याम् from both his ears, असृजत् released, तस्मात् therefore, गङ्गा Ganga, जह्नुसुता daughter of Jahnu, जाह्नवीति Jahnavi, प्रोच्यते is being called.
1::43::36::गङ्गा Ganga, पुन: again, भगीरथरथानुगा following the chariot of Bhagiratha, जगाम had proceeded, तदा then, सा she, सरित्प्रवरा best among rivers, Ganga, सागरम् ocean, सम्प्राप्ता अपि having reached also, तस्य कर्मण: of his desires, सिद्ध्यर्थम् forfulfillment, रसातलम्  nether regions, उपागच्छत् reached. 
1::43::37::राजर्षि: royal saint, भगीरथोऽपि Bhagiratha also, यत्नत: with supreme efforts, गङ्गाम् Ganga, आदाय having brought, दीनचेतन: with grieved mind, भस्मकृतान् reduced to ashes, पितामहान् grand fathers, अपश्यत् beheld.
1::43::38::रघूत्तम O Rama, अथ thereafter, उत्तमम् excellent, गङ्गासलिलम् waters of Ganga, तत् भस्मनाम् those ashes, राशिम् heap, प्लावयत् inundated, धूतपापा: purged of sins, स्वर्गम् heaven, प्राप्ता: obtained. 
