1::37::1::In olden days when Iswara was engaged in austerities, the devatas together with the ascetics, approached Lord Brahma for an army general.  
1::37::2::Then led by Indra and the Firegod all devatas approached Lord Brahma, the grandsire saluted him (with folded hands) and spoke. 
1::37::3::O Lord in ancient times your lordship gave us an army general (at the time of creation). He is engrossed in great penance along with Uma . 
1::37::4::O Knower of law and order O Grandsire verily you are our supreme refuge committed to the welfare of the worlds. Tell us what we should do in this matter (now that we cannot procreate a general on account of Uma's curse).
1::37::5::Hearing the words of the devatas, Brahma, the Grandsire of all the worlds consoled the devatas with sweet words, saying:
1::37::6::
1::37::7::Ganga keeps flowing in the celestial regions. Through Ganga the Firegod will beget a son who will be capable of destroying enemies. He will become the army general of the gods.
1::37::8:: Ganga, the eldest daughter of the king of the mountains, will tend that son of Agni. This will be totally acceptable to Uma. No doubt. 
1::37::9::O son of the Raghus having heard Brahma's words all the devatas considered themselves successful in their mission. They saluted him with folded hands and offered their worship.
1::37::10::All the devatas, went to mount Kailasa, adorned with minerals, and urged the Firegod for a son.
1::37::11::'O lustrous Firegod, accomplish this divine work. O god, possessed of mighty energy, release the vital fluid of Iswara in Ganga, daughter of the king of mountains. 
1::37::12::The Firegod gave his consent. The devatas approached Ganga and said, 'O goddess bear the energy of Siva (inyour world) since this cause is dear to the gods'.
1::37::13::Hearing the words of the Firegod, Ganga assumed a divine form. Beholding her glory, the god of fire pervaded her from all sides.
1::37::14::O Rama then, the Firegod discharged the vital fluid of Iswara, preserved in his body, which pervaded all sides of Ganga and all her streams were filled with (the fluid). 
1::37::15::Ganga addressing the Firegod standing ahead of all the devatas said 'O god of fire, I am incapable of holding your everincreasing splendour. The fiery fluid is burning me. My consciousness is overwhelmed'.
1::37::16::Thereafter the Firegod who is the partaker of oblations offered to all deities said to Ganga 'Place this embryo on this slope of Mountain Himavan'.   
1::37::17::O glorious, sinless one, (Rama) hearing the words of the Firegod, Ganga then expelled that resplendent embryo from her streams.  
1::37::18::The embryo that emerged from Ganga reached the earth. It resembled the lustre of molten gold. It furned into gold auspicious, bright and pure.
1::37::19::There copper and iron were produced from its acidity, zinc and lead from its residue. Various minerals were formed when that embryo reached the earth.
1::37::20::When the embryo was placed (in Ganga) it spread on all sides of the forest on the mountain. Irradiated with lustre the forest appeared golden. 
1::37::21::O tiger among men, O scion of the Raghus Then onwards gold which is effulgent like fire, became wellknown as Jatarupa (pure form). The grass, shrubs, creepers and trees of that forest looked golden. 
1::37::22::Thereafter Kumara was born (out of Ganga's womb). The gods together with Indra arranged six nymphs (stars) to act  as nurses to suckle Kumara as their own offspring.
1::37::23::Those krittikas, having decided among themselves and having made an agreement with the gods saying 'This boy shall become a son to all of us' fed the newborn with their milk (breast milk).
1::37::24::Thereafter, all the gods said, 'This son shall become renowned in the three worlds as Karttikeya, (son of krittikas). There is no doubt '. 
1::37::25::Hearing the words of the gods, the krittikas bathed the baby that descended from the womb of Ganga resembling flaming fire and shining with great beauty.
1::37::26::O scion of the Kakusthas, Karttikeya lustrous like flaming fire, was very fortunate Descended from the womb of the Ganga, he is named Skanda by the gods. 
1::37::27::Then excellent milk surged in the breasts of krittikas. Assuming six mouths, he sucked the milk.
1::37::28::Drinking milk just for a day and with a body still tender he could vanquish hosts of demons by his inborn prowess so capable be was
1::37::29::With the Firegod in the forefront, all the gods assembled and installed Karttikeya, shining on unsurpassed brilliant, as commander of the gods forces. 
1::37::30::O Rama this story of Ganga and that of the  birth of Kumara, who was fortunate and auspicious, has been related to you in detail.   
1::37::31::O son of the Kakusthas whosoever reveres Kartikeya on this earth with devotion and faith, shall have a long life, sons and grandsons and after death will reach the world of Skanda.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डेण्डे सप्तत्रिंशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the thirtyseventh sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
