1::58::1::O Rama to these words of king Trisanku, the hundred sons of the sage angrily reacted:
1::58::2:: 'O Evilminded one having been refused by the Guru true to his word, how could you bypass him and approach us who are mere off shoots (of the main).
1::58::3::For all the kings of the Ikshvakus race, their chief priest is their Guru. It is not possible to bypass the spiritual preceptor who is true to his word preceptor.   
1::58::4::When an adorable sage like Vasishta has already said, it is not possible, how can we help you conduct such a sacrifice?
1::58::5:: O Best one among men you are childish. Return to your capital. O Monarch the most venerable Vasishta is capable of conducting sacrifices performed by anybody in the three worlds. How can we dishonour him'?
1::58::6::Having heard the confused words uttered by the sages in a state of anger, the king said again:
1::58::7::O Men endowed with the wealth of asceticism I was rejected by my guru and now by his sons. I shall seek another way. Farewell to you.
1::58::8::Having seen his fierce intent, the saint's sons were infuriated. They cursed him saying, Be a Chandala 
1::58::9::With this the highsouled sons of Vasishta entered their hermitage. And one night after the king became a Chandala (a lowcaste man).
1::58::10::The king was tranformed into a darkcomplexioned dirty man with dishevelled hair. His body was besmeared with ashes and on his robes lay wreath collected from the cemetery. He had on him dark (soiled) clothes, and ornaments made of iron.
1::58::11::O Rama seeing him in the form of a chandala, all his counsellors, inhabitants of the city including his followers fled away.
1::58::12:: O Descendant of Kakustha wandering alone burning with distress night and day the king went to Viswamitra who was rich in asceticism.
1::58::13::O Rama on seeing the king reduced to a useless a chandala, sage Viswamitra was touched with pity.  
1::58::14::Exceedingly energetic and deeply pious, he looked at the king who was frightful in appearance and addressed him with compassion saying, welfare to you. 
1::58::15::O Mighty prince what brings your here, for you are the heroic lord of Ayodhya? Whose curse turned you into a chandala?
1::58::16::In response to his words the king,  who had fallen into the state of a chandala yet proficient in expression, spoke to one (Viswamitra) expert in speech, with folded hands.
1::58::17::Rejected by my guru and his sons, what I achieved was disaster and what I could not was the fulfilment of my wish.
1::58::18::O Gentle sage it is my intention to enter heaven with my physical body. I performed a hundred sacrifices but  did not reap its fruit.
1::58::19:: O Gentle sage I have never told a lie in spite of troubled circumstances, I shall never dabble in falsehood. I swear upon it by kshatriya morality . 
1::58::20::I have performed various sacirifices and ruled over my people guided by the law of righteousness. I have pleased eminent elders with my conduct and character.
1::58::21::O Preeminent among sages I endeavour to do my duty. I intend to perform a sacrifice. My gurus do not appreciate this.
1::58::22::I consider destiny to be allpowerful. The effort of a man goes in vain. Everything is controlled by destiny. It is the supreme resort.
1::58::23::My merits have been destroyed by destiny. Deeply afflicted, I crave a favour from you. You are fit to grant it. Wish you well
1::58::24::I will not take refuge in anybody. There is no other protector for me. You are capable of averting my reverses in fate with human effort.   इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे अष्टपञ्चाशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the fiftyeighth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
