1::51::1::Satananda the eldest son of Gautama, a great sage who looked brilliant with the power of austerities was thrilled to hear the words of Viswamitra the intellectual and experienced great astonishment on beholding Rama.
1::51::2::Satananda saw the two princes comfortably seated nearby and said to Viswamitra, the foremost of the ascetics:
1::51::3::O Tiger among ascetics, was my renowned mother who had been practising intense austerities for long shown to the prince (Rama)?
1::51::4::Did my highly lustrous and celebrated mother offer homage to Rama, worthy of reverence by all living beings, with things available in the forest?
1::51::5::O highly powerful sage, was Rama told the old story about the misdeed of god (Indra) to my mother?
1::51::6::O Son of Kushika (Viswamitra) be blessed. O the best among the ascetics, as a result of beholding Rama, was my mother united with my father?
1::51::7::O Son of Kushika was Rama honoured by my father? Was my most brilliant father  honoured by illustrious Rama when he arrived?
1::51::8::O Kushika's son did pious Rama welcome my father with a tranquil mind when he arrived?
1::51::9::Great sage Viswamitra equipped with the knowledge of words heard Satananda who was proficient in speech. And replied:
1::51::10::O Best of ascetics (Satananda) All that is required to be done has been done and nothing was omitted. Ahalya was united with sage Gautama like Renuka with Jamadagni.
1::51::11::Having heard Viswamitra the highly brilliant Satananda said to Rama:
1::51::12::O Best of men O Son of the Raghus you are fortunate to have come here following the invincible maharshi Viswamitra. Welcome to you.
1::51::13::Highly lustrous Viswamitra has performed deeds which defy all imagination. By his austerities, he became Brahmarshi and possesses unparalleled radiance. Know him to be the supreme resort.
1::51::14::Rama Son of Kushika (Viswamitra) who has performed great austerities is your protector. Therefore, there is none on this earth more fortunate than you.
1::51::15::I shall tell you about the power and achievement of the magnanimous son of Kushika Viswamitra. Listen
1::51::16::This righteousminded sage, subduer of enemies, knower of dharma knowledgeable in all branches of learning, devoted to the welfare of his subjects ruled as a king for long.
1::51::17::There was a king named Kusa who was the son of Brahma. His son was Kusanabha who was supremely righteous and strong.   
1::51::18::Wellknown Gadhi was the son of Kusanabha. Highly lustrous and mighty ascetic Viswamitra is the son of Gadhi.
1::51::19::Highly lustrous Viswamitra ruled the earth. As a king he ruled over his kingdom for  thousands of years.  
1::51::20::Once that highly lustrous Viswamitra having assembled his army of the magnitude of akshauhini went round the earth.
1::51::21::Rama while Viswamitra was wandering about kingdoms, cities, rivers, mountains and  hermitages, he gradually reached the ashram of Vasishta. That hermitage afounded in a variety of trees, species of animals, siddhas, charanas, devatas, danavas, gandharvas and kinnaras, multitudes of birds and resting deer. It was inhabited by brahmarshis and devarishis, by sages who had attained perfection through austerities, by those resembling fire in brightness, by the magnanimous and the selfrestrained, by those who had conquered anger and controlled their senses, who was devoted to prayers and offerings of libations. Some of them subsisted on water, some on air. Some lived on fallen leaves, some on fruits and roots. The hermitage looked bedecked with valakhilyas (born from Vala of Brahma ) and vaikhanasas (born from the nails of Brahma).
1::51::22::Highly powerful Viswamitra, foremost among the conquerors, (thus) saw the hermitage of Vasishta which looked like another Brahmaloka.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकपञ्चाशस्सर्ग:।Thus ends the fiftyfirst sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
