1::76::1::तदा then, दाशरथि: Rama, जमदग्न्यस्य Parasurama's, (तत्) वाक्यम् words, श्रुत्वा having heard, पितु: father's, गौरवात् out of respect, यन्त्रितकथ: avoiding furthur conversation, अथ thereafter, रामम् addressing Parasurama, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::76::2::भार्गव O Bhrigu's son, Parasurama, यत् which, कर्म acts, कृतवानसि you have done, श्रुतवान्  अस्मि I have listened, ब्रह्मन् O Brahman, पितुः to your father, आनृण्यम् repaying the debt, आस्थितम् obtained, अनुरुन्ध्यामहे we will commend.
1::76::3::भार्गव O Descendant of Bhrugu, वीर्यहीनमिव as if I am without valour, क्षत्रधर्मेण by duties of Kshatriya, अशक्तमिव as though incompetant, अवजानासि you are insulting me, अद्य today, मे my, तेज: energy, पराक्रमम् valour, पश्य you may witness.
1::76::4::लघुपराक्रम: with quick vigour, राघव: Rama, क्रुद्ध: enraged, इति उक्त्वा having thus spoken, भार्गवस्य from Parasurama's, हस्तात् hand, शरासनम् bow, शरं च also an arrow, प्रतिजग्राह grasped (pulled).
1::76::5::स: that, राम: Rama, धनु: bow, आरोप्य bending it, शरम् arrow, सज्यम् stretching the string, चकार performed, राम: Rama, तत: thereafter, क्रुद्ध: enraged, जामदग्न्यं son of Jamadagni, रामम् Parasurama, वच: words, अब्रवीत् spoke. 
1::76::6::राम O Parasurama, ब्राह्मण: असि you are a brahmin, इति for this reason, विश्वामित्रकृतेन through Visvamitra, मे for me, पूज्य: worthy of homage, तस्मात् for that reason, ते your, प्राणहरणम् life taking, शरम् arrow, मोक्तुम् to release,न शक्त: I am not competent. 
1::76::7::राम O Parasurama, ते your, इमाम् this, पादगतिम् movement of your feet, तपोबलसमार्जिताम्  earned through asceteic energy, अप्रतिमान् incomparable, लोकान् वा worlds, हनिष्यामि I shall destroy, यत् whichever, इच्छसि you are desiring, tell me. 
1::76::8::परपुरञ्जय: conquering hostile cities, वीर्येण by prowess, बलदर्पविनाशन: destroyer of the pride and strength, दिव्य: celestial, अयम् this, वैष्णव: शर: arrow of Vishnu, मोघ: vain, न पतति हि shall not fall.
1::76::9::वरायुधधरम् holding that mighty weapon, रामम् Rama, द्रष्टुम् to behold, सर्षिगणा: accompanied by sages, सुरा: devatas, पितामहम् grandsire, पुरस्कृत्य keeping in forefront, तत्र there, सङ्घश: in groups, समेता: assembled, गन्धर्वाप्सरसश्चैव gandharvas and apsaras,  सिद्धचारणकिन्नरा: siddhas, charanas, kinnaras, यक्षराक्षसनागाश्च yakshas, rakshsas, nagas, तत् that, महत् great, अद्भुतम् wonder, द्रष्टुम् to see (came).
1::76::10::तदा then, रामे when Rama, वरधनुर्धरे was bearing that excellent bow, लोके world, जडीकृते having been made motionless, असौ this, जामदग्नय: son of Jamadagni, राम: Parasurama, निर्वीर्य: bereft of prowess, रामम् Rama, उदैक्षत gazed at him.
1::76::11::तेजोभि: हतवीर्यत्वात् having been subdued of his energy by the prowess of Rama, जडीकृत: having been made motionless, जामदग्न्य: son of Jamadagni, कमलपत्राक्षम् him whose eyes resembling lotus petals, रामम् Rama, मन्दं मन्दम् slowly, slowly, उवाच ह spoke.
1::76::12::पूर्वम् formerly, वसुन्धरा earth, यदा when, मया by me, काश्यपाय for Kasyapa, दत्ता was  given, मे my, विषये in my country, न वस्तव्यम् इति shall not live, माम् me, काश्यप: Kasyapa, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::76::13::सः अहम् such I, गुरुवच: words of my spiritual guide, कुर्वन् following, पृथिव्याम् on this earth, निशाम् during night, न वसे I will not live, काकुस्त्थ O Rama, प्रतिज्ञा vow, कृता has been made, भू: earth, काश्यपस्य for Kasyapa, कृता हि has been given.
1::76::14::वीर O Valourous one, राघव Rama, तत् for that reason, त्वम् you, इमाम् this, गतिम् power of motion, हन्तुम् to destroy, नार्हसि is not fit, मनोजवम् with the speed of mind, महेंद्रम् Mahendra mountain, पर्वतोत्तमम् best of hills, गमिष्यामि I shall go.
1::76::15::राम O Rama, मया by me, अप्रतिमा: unrivalled, लोका: worlds, तपसा by asceticism, निर्जिता: have been conquered, तान् them, शरमुख्येन with this chief of arrows, जहि strike, कालस्य time, पर्यय: delay, माभूत् let not happen.
1::76::16::अस्य this, धनुष: bow's, परामर्शात् from stretching, त्वाम् you, अक्षय्यम् imperishable one, सुरेश्वरम् lord of devatas, मधुहन्तारम् Visnu, the slayer of Madhu, जानामि I know, परंतप tormentor of enemies, ते स्वस्ति अस्तु safety to you.
1::76::17::समागता: assembled, एते these, सर्वे all, सुरगणा: hosts of devatas, अप्रतिमकर्माणम् of  incomparable deeds, आहवे in the combat, अप्रतिद्वन्द्वम् unassailable, त्वाम् you, निरीक्षन्ते are looking at. 
1::76::18::काकुत्स्थ O Rama, त्रैलोक्यनाथेन by the lord of three worlds, त्वया by you, अहम् I, यत् that    (I am), विमुखीकृत: have been defeated, इयम् this one, मे to me, व्रीडा shame, भवितुम् to become, न अर्हति does not behove. 
1::76::19::सुव्रत one faithful to vows, राम Rama, अप्रतिमम् incomparable, शरम् arrow, मोक्तुम् to release, अर्हसि behoves of you, शरमोक्षे after release of the arrow, पर्वतोत्तमम् excellent of mountains, महेन्द्रम् Mahendra, गमिष्यामि I shall go.
1::76::20::जामदग्नये when the son of Jamadagni, रामे Parasurama, तथा in that way, ब्रुवति was saying, प्रतापवान् valiant, दाशरथि: son of Dasaratha, राम: Rama, उत्तमम् excellent, शरम् arrow, चिक्षेप employed. 
1::76::21::स: that, जामदग्न्य: Parasurama, तपसा by asceticism, अर्जितान् earned, स्वान् his own, लोकान् worlds, रामेण by Rama, हतान् struck, दृश्य having seen, आशु speedily, पर्वतोत्तमम् excellent among mountains, महेन्द्रम् Mahendra, जगाम went.
1::76::22::तत: thereafter, सर्वा all, दिश: quarters, तथा also, उपदिश: intermediate quarters, वितिमिरा:  were cleared of darkness, सर्षिगणा: hosts of sages, सुरा: devatas, उदायुधम् wielding that bow, रामम् Rama, प्रशशंसु: extolled.
1::76::23::प्रभु: competent, जामदग्न्य: son of Jamadagni, राम: Parasurama, दाशरथिम् son of Dasaratha, रामम् Rama, प्रशस्य च having praised, तत: then, प्रदक्षिणीकृत्य having circumambulated him, आत्मगतिम् to his own abode, जगाम went.
