1::55::1::तत: thereafter, वसिष्ठ: Vasishta, विश्वामित्रास्त्रमोहितान् stupefied by weapons of Visvamitra, आकुलान् agitated, तान् them, दृष्ट्वा having seen, कामधुक् O Kamadhenu, योगत: through yogic power, सृज create, चोदयामास thus he directed. 
1::55::2::तस्या: her, हुम्भारवात् from the sound of 'Humba, रविसन्निभा: equal to Sun (in brightness), काम्भोजा: Kambhojas, जाता: were born, अथ and, ऊधस: from udder, शस्त्रपाणय: with  weapons in their hands, पप्लवा: Paplavas, सञ्जाता: were born, योनिदेशात् च from womb, यवना: Yavanas, तथा and, शकृद्देशात् from anus, शका: Sakas, रोमकूपेषु from roots of hair , म्लेच्छा: mlecchas, सकिराता: alomg with kiratas, हारीता: Haritas, were born.   
1::55::3::रघुनन्दन O Descendent of Raghu's, तैस्तै: those and those, तत्क्षणात् instantly, विश्वामित्रस्य Visvamitra's, सपदातिगजम् with infantry and elephants, साश्वम् with horses, सरथम् with chariots, सर्वम् entire(army), निषूदितम् has been destroyed. 
1::55::4::महात्मना by the magnanimous, वसिष्ठेन by Vasishta, निषूदितम् destroyed, सैन्यम् army, दृष्ट्वा having seen, विश्वामित्रसुतानाम् sons of Visvamitra, शतम् one hundred, नानाविधायुधम् armed with various kinds of weapons, सुसङ्कृद्धम् extremely furious, जपतां वरम् best among ascetics practising Japa, वसिष्ठम् towards Vasishta, अभ्यधावत् rushed towards him, भगवान् adorable, ऋषि: sage Vasishta, तान् सर्वान् all of them, हुंकारेणैव with 'Humkara alone, ददाह burnt.   
1::55::5::तदा then, साश्वरथपादाता: together with horses, chariots and footsoldiers, ते विश्वामित्रसुता: those sons of Visvamitra, महात्मना by the magnanimous, वसिष्ठेन by Vasishta, मुहूर्तेन in a moment, भस्मीकृता: were reduced to ashes.   
1::55::6::तदा then, सुमहायशा: possessing high fame, विश्वामित्र: Visvamitra, विनाशितान् destroyed, पुत्रान् sons, बलं च army, दृष्ट्वा having seen, सव्रीड: was filled with shame, चिन्तया in thought, आविष्ट: अभवत् pondered over.
1::55::7::निर्वेग: without speed (waves), समुद्र: इव like ocean, भग्नदंष्ट्र: bereft of fangs, उरग: इव like snake, उपरक्त: eclipsed by Rahu, आदित्य: इव like Sun, सद्य: suddenly, निष्प्रभताम् devoid of his effulgence, गत: obtained.
1::55::8::हतपुत्रबल: with sons and army having been killed, लूनपक्ष: with wings cut off, द्विज: इव  like the bird, दीन: wretched, हतदर्प: with vanished pride, हतोत्साह: with shattered confidence, निर्वेदम् despondency, समपद्यत obtained. 
1::55::9::स: he, पृथिवीम् the earth, क्षत्रधर्मेण in accordance with the tradition of Kshatriya, पालय  rule, इति thus, एकम् one, पुत्रम् son, राज्याय for the kingdom, नियुज्य having appointed, वनमेव forest, अन्वपद्यत reached.   
1::55::10::महातपा: mighty ascetic, स: he, किन्नरोरगसेवितम् inhabited by kinnaras and urgas, हिमवत्पार्श्वं on the slopes of Himavat mountain, गत्वा having gone, महादेवप्रसादार्थम् with a view to propitiate lord Mahadeva, तप: austerities, तेपे performed.   
1::55::11::अथ thereafter, केनचित्कालेन after some time, देवेश: lord of devatas, वृषभध्वज: with bull as his symbol (banner), वरद: bestower of boons, महाबलम् possessing great strength, विश्वामित्रम् Visvamitra, दर्शयामास showed himself. 
1::55::12::राजन् O King, किमर्थं what for, तप्यसे are you performing penance? ते to you, यत् which, विवक्षितम् intended to be conveyed, (तत् that one), ब्रूहि tell, वरद: अस्मि I am bestower of boons, य: वर: which boon, ते by you, काङ्क्षित: desired, स: that, अभिधीयताम् let it be spoken.    
1::55::13::देवेन by that god, एवम् thus, उक्त: spoken, महातपा: performer of mighty austerities, विश्वामित्र: Visvamitra, महादेवम् to Mahadeva, प्रणिपत्य having prostrated,  इदम् this, वचनम् word, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::55::14::अनघ O Irreproachable one, महादेव Mahadeva, तुष्ट: यदि if pleased, साङ्गोपाङ्गोपनिषद: with angas (branches), upangas (subdivisions), upanishads, सरहस्य: with secrets, धनुर्वेद: Dhanurveda, the science of archery, मम to me, प्रदीयताम् let it be given.
1::55::15::अनघ O Irreproachable one, देवेषु in devatas, दानवेषु in danavas, महर्षिषु in maharshis, गन्धर्वयक्षरक्षस्सु In gandharvas, yakshas, rakashas, यानि अस्त्राणि whatever weapons are known, मम प्रतिभान्तु let them be present in my mind (let them flash in my mind).   
1::55::16::देवदेव O Lord of gods, तव by your, प्रसादात् favour, मम my, ईप्सितम् desire, भवतु be fulfilled, एवम् अस्तु Be it so, इति thus, देवेश: lord of devatas, Mahadeva, (वाक्यं )उक्त्वा having spoken, तदा then, गत: returned (to bis abode).
1::55::17::महाबल: endowed with supreme power, राजर्षि: rajarshi, महता by great, दर्पेण pride, युक्त: endowed with, विश्वामित्र: Visvamitra, तदा then, अस्त्राणि weapons, प्राप्य having obtained, दर्पपूर्ण: अभवत् filled with insolence.
1::55::18::पर्वणि on the day of the full Moon and new Moon, समुद्र इव like sea, वीर्येण with energy, विवर्धमान: growing, ऋषिसत्तमम् foremost of ascetics, वसिष्ठम् Vasishta, तदा then, हतमेव slain only, मेने thought over.
1::55::19::तत: there after, पार्थिव: king, आश्रमपदम् towards hermitage (of Vasishta), गत्वा having gone, अस्त्राणि weapons, मुमोच released, यै: by their energy, तत् सर्वम् all that, तपोवनम् forest of ascetics (for carrying austerities ), अस्त्रतेजसा by the power of those weapons, निर्दग्धम् was burnt.
1::55::20::धीमत: by the sagacious, विश्वामित्रस्य Visvamitra's, तत् that, उदीर्यमाणम् being roused, अस्त्रम् weapons, दृष्ट्वा having seen, शतश: in hundreds, मुनय: saints, सर्वे all, दिश: in all directions, विप्रद्रुता: fled. 
1::55::21::वसिष्ठस्य Vasishta's, ये those, शिष्या: disciples, तथैव as well as, मृगपक्षिण: animals and birds, भयात् for the reason of fear, भीता: terrified, सहस्रश: in thousands, नानादिग्भ्य: in all directions, विद्रवन्ति fled.
1::55::22::महात्मन: of the magnanimous, वसिष्ठस्य Vasishta's, आश्रमपदम् hermitage, शून्यम् आसीत् has become deserted, मुहूर्तमिव in an instant as though, इरिणसन्निभम् like barren field, निश्शब्दम्  आसीत् became silent.   
1::55::23::भास्कर: Sun, नीहारमिव like mist, गाधेयम् son of Gadhi, अद्य now, नाशयामि I will destroy, माभै: fear not, इति thus, वसिष्ठस्य Vasishta, मुहुर्मुहु: repeatedly, वदत: while saying (they fled), not withstanding his assurance.   
1::55::24::महातेजा: highly lustrous, जपतां वर: foremost among those who utter prayers, वसिष्ठ: Vasishta, एवम् thus, उक्त्वा having said, तदा then, विश्वामित्रम् Visvamitra, सरोषम् with anger, इदम् this, वाक्यम् word, अब्रवीत् spoke.
1::55::25::मूढ O Fool, चिरसम्वृद्धम् developed over long time, आश्रमम् hermitage, यत् for what reason, विनाशितवान् असि you have destroyed, तत् for that reason, दुराचार: असि you are illbehaved, तस्मात् for that reason, त्वम् you, न भविष्यसि will not live.
1::55::26::इति thus, उक्त्वा having spoken, सत्वर: speedily, परमक्रुद्ध: exceedingly furious, विधूमम्  smokeless, कालाग्निमिव like fire at the destruction of the worlds, अपरम् another, यमदण्डमिव like the staff of death, दण्डम् staff, उद्यम्य lifting up.
