1::68::1::Commanded by Janaka the messengers travelled for three days, rested for three nights on the way and entered the city of Ayodhya along with their horses tired.  
1::68::2:: Reaching the king's palace the messengers said to the doorkeepers, Let king Dasaratha be immediately informed that the messengers from Janaka have come.
1::68::3::Having heard their words, the doorkeepers informed the descendant of Raghu (king Dasaratha). Thereafter, with the the king's permission, the messengers entered the royal palace  and beheld the aged king Dasaratha who shone like a god.
1::68::4::All the messengers, hands folded free from apprehensions, reverentially addressed the king in sweet words.
1::68::5::O Great monarch Mithila's lord, king Janaka, with the sacred fire in front again and again enquires about your health and the spiritual wellbeing of your preceptors, priests and attendants in words filled with sweetness and affection.
1::68::6::Janaka, the king of Mithila with the enquiry about your welfare, with the permission of the son of Kausika (Viswamitra) sends you this message:
1::68::7::O King It is wellknown that formerly I had vowed to give my daughter to a groom as a reward for prowess. Disappointed when proved powerless, the kings became indignant and opposed me.
1::68::8::O King that this daughter of mine has been won by your heroic son Rama  who has come here casually led by Viswamitra.
1::68::9::O Great king, Dasaratha the divine bow with its limitless glory was broken in the middle by the great self Rama in the assembly of people.
1::68::10::Sita is fit to be given in marriage to this eminent Rama as a reward for his prowess. I request you to give your consent to fulfil my vow.
1::68::11::O Mighty king be blessed. Come here soon with your preceptors and priest. You ought to be reumitd with Rama amd Lakshmana.
1::68::12::O Indra among kings you will not only bring me pleasure, you will also be happy to see your sons.
1::68::13:: The king of Videha (Janaka) with Viswamitra's approval and in line with Satananda's thinking has conveyed these sweet words. The messengers having said so concluded  out of respect for their king (afraid that they might look overtalkative).
1::68::14::Exceedingly happy to hear the words of the messengers, the king said to Vasishta, Vamadeva and other ministers. 
1::68::15:: The enhancer of the joy of Kausalya (Rama) along with hs brother Lakshmana under the protection of  Viswamitra  is now staying in the coutry of the Videhas.
1::68::16:: Illustrious Janaka desires to bestow his daughter on the descendat of Kakustha (Rama) whose prowess he has witnessed.      
1::68::17::If you approve the action, of the distinguished Janaka, let us hurry to the city of Mithila. Let there be no delay.
1::68::18::All the maharshis and the ministers said, 'certainly so'. And the king, overwhelmed with joy, said, we start tomorrow.
1::68::19::The virtuous counsellors of the Indra among kings highly  honoured  spent the night happily.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे अष्टषष्टितमस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the sixtyeighth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
