1::59::1::What the king said was proved by his chandala form which the son of Kushika (Viswamitra) heard and out of compassion spoke these sweet words:
1::59::2::O Descendant of Ikshvakus, O child, welcome. I know you as highly righteous. O eminent among kings fear not. I offer you refuge.
1::59::3::O king I shall invite pious maharshis to assist you in the sacrifice which you will be able to perform with great relief.
1::59::4:: With the present physical body disfigured by the curse of your spiritual preceptor, you shall go to heaven.
1::59::5:: O King since you have taken refuge in Viswamitra who is the protector of those who resort to him, I think heaven is already within your reach.
1::59::6::Most brilliant Viswamitra having thus spoken, ordered his deeply religious and highly learned sons to make preparations for the sacrifice.
1::59::7::He summoned all his disciples, and said, Children bring here hosts of rishis along with their disciples and friends, officiating priests and persons wellversed in the Srutis. This is my order.
1::59::8:: If any one should speak with disrespect in response to my order, you may report the matter to me in full. 
1::59::9::At his command the disciples set out in different directions. And as a result, expounders of the vedas began arriving from various countries.
1::59::10::All the disciples on their return, communicated to the sage shining in splendour what the expounders of the vedas had said.
1::59::11:: Having heard your words, all brahmins except Mahodaya have arrived from all countries.  
1::59::12::O Preeminent among ascetics Here is what the hundred sons of Vasishta spoke in anger.  
1::59::13::When a kshatriya acts as a priest for the sacrifice, particularly for a chandala, how can gods and sages partake the offerings?  
1::59::14:: Joining Viswamitra, (in chanting the mantras during the yaga) how will the great brahmins attain heaven after partaking the food offered by of Chandala?
1::59::15::O Best among ascetics all the sons of Vasishta along with Mahodaya with their eyes reddened in anger spoke these harsh words: 
1::59::16::On hearing the words (of the hundred sons of Vasishta uttered in anger) Viswamitra, preeminent among ascetics, spoke furiously with eyes reddened in anger.
1::59::17::I am blameless. I have practised rigorous penance. These wicked ones who have abused (a sage like me) will be reduced to ashes.
1::59::18::Caught by the noose of death this day, they shall be brought  to the abode of Yama  and for seven hundred births, feed on corpses.
1::59::19:: Reborn as the merciless race of mushtikas, feeding on the flesh of dogs, hideous and deformed, they shall wander in these worlds. 
1::59::20:: The wicked Mahodaya, who blamed a sage like me so faultless shall be reborn in the race of the nishadas vulnerable to abuse by all.
1::59::21::As a consequence of my anger that Mahodaya, devoid of mercy and  taking pleasure in depriving others of their life, will pursue a wretched life for a long time.  
1::59::22::The most powerful sage Viswamitra of fierce asceticism fell silent after after uttering this curse in the assembly of rishis.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे एकोनषष्टितमस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the fiftyninth sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
