1::5::1::सर्वाः all (bounded by all islands), कृत्स्ना entirely, इयं वसुन्धरा this earth, प्रजापतिम् उपादाय commencing from Prajapati (Manu) and his descendents, जयशालिनाम् of victorious, येषां  नृपाणाम् relating to those kings, पूर्वम् in the olden periods, आसीत् belonged.
1::5::2::येन by whom, सागर: ocean, खानित: was made to be dug, यान्तम् while he was marching (to the battle), यम् whom, षष्टि: पुत्रसहस्राणि sixty thousand sons, पर्यवारयन् surrounded by, स: that, सगरो नाम king named Sagara, येषाम् amongst those.                                
1::5::3::तेषाम् their, महात्मनाम् mighty monarchs, इक्ष्वाकूणाम् of the Ikshvakus, राज्ञाम् of kings, वंशे in that race, रामायणमिति known as 'Ramayanam', श्रुतम् celebrated, महत् great, इदम् this, आख्यानम् epic, उत्पन्नम् arose.
1::5::4::तत् thence, इदम् this (Ramayanam), सर्वम् completely, वर्तयिष्यामि I shall propagate in this world, निखिलम् the entire Ramayanam, धर्मकामार्थसहितम् incorporating the merits of dharma, artha and kama, आदित: from the beginning, अनसूयया without prejudice, श्रोतव्यम् should be heard .         
1::5::5::प्रभूतधनधान्यवान् abundant in foodgrains and wealth, मुदित: rejoiced, स्फीत: prosperous, कोसलो नाम named Kosala, महान् great, जनपद: country, सरयूतीरे on the banks of river Sarayu, निविष्ट: was situated. 
1::5::6::तत्र in that Kosala country, या पुरी that city, मानवेन्द्रेण by lord of men, मनुना by Manu, स्वयम् personally, निर्मिता built, अयोध्या नाम named Ayodhya, लोकविश्रुता famous, नगरी city, आसीत् existed.
1::5::7::श्रीमती beautiful and pleasing, सुविभक्तमहापथा welllaid out thoroughfares, महापुरी that great city of Ayodhya, दश च द्वे च twelve, योजनानि yojanas (fortyeight krosas or ninetysix miles), आयता in length, त्रीणि three yojanas (twelve krosas or twenty four miles), विस्तीर्णा in breadth.
1::5::8::सुविभक्तेन with welllaid out, मुक्तपुष्पावकीर्णेन strewn with fully blown blossoms, नित्यश: regularly, जलसिक्तेन sprinkled with water, महता by great, राजमार्गेण by principal highway, शोभिता looked splendid.
1::5::9::महाराष्ट्रविवर्धन: developing the prosperity of that great kingdom, राजा दशरथ: king Dasaratha, देवपति: Indra, दिवं यथा like heaven, तां पुरीम् that city, आवासयामास lived.
1::5::10::कवाटतोरणवतीम् having arched outer gateways ornamented with panel doors, सुविभक्तान्तरापणाम् numerous welllaid local markets, सर्वयन्त्रायुधवतीम् having all kinds of  instruments and weapons, सर्वशिल्पिभि: all kinds of artificers, उपेताम् possessed of.
1::5::11::सूतमागधसम्बाधाम् abounded in euologists and genealogists praising the kings, श्रीमतीम् prosperous, अतुलप्रभाम् having matchless splendour, उच्चाट्टालध्वजवतीम् with stately edifices decorated with flags, शतघ्नीशतसङ्कुलाम् possessed of hundreds of sataghnis (missiles). 
1::5::12::वधूनाटकसङ्घैश्च by hosts of female dancers and actors, संयुक्ताम् furnished with, सर्वत: पुरीम् on all sides of the city (surrounded by suburban towns), उद्यानाम्रवणोपेताम् filled with  gardens and mangogroves, महतीम् extensive, सालमेखलाम् rampart of sal trees as a girdle. 
1::5::13::दुर्गगम्भीरपरिघाम् having strong fortifications and deep moat, दुर्गाम् difficult to access, अन्यै: by others, दुरासदाम् incapable of being approached, वाजिवारणसम्पूर्णां abounded with horses and elephants, तथा and, गोभि: by cattle, उष्ट्रै: by camels, खरै: by mules.
1::5::14::बलिकर्मभि: by kings who make payment of tribute, सामन्तराजसङ्घैश्च by a host of tributary kings from neighbouring kingdoms, आवृताम् thronged, नानादेशनिवासै: by people from different countries, वणिग्भि: च with merchants also, उपशोभिताम् embellished.
1::5::15::रत्नविकृतै: modified with precious gems(and decorated), प्रासादै: by palaces, पर्वतै: by mountains, उपशोभिताम् resplendent, कूटागारै: च by mansions, सम्पूर्णाम् complete, इन्द्रस्य अमरावतीमिव like Indra's Amaravati.
1::5::16::चित्राम् wonderful to behold, अष्टापदाकाराम् like the shape of a board used to play the game of Ashtapada, the game of chance, नरनारीगणै: by groups of men and women, युताम् endowed with, सर्वरत्नसमाकीर्णाम् rich in all kinds of gems, विमानगृहशोभिताम् adorned with sevenstoried palaces. 
1::5::17::गृहगाढाम् dense with dwellings, अविच्छिद्राम् no place left without being utilised, समभूमौ  on a levelled land, निवेशिताम् constructed, शालितण्डुलसम्पूर्णाम् stocked fully with paddy and rice, इक्षुकाण्डरसोदकाम् water tasting like sugarcane juice.
1::5::18::दुन्दुभीभि: by trumpets, मृदङ्गैश्च by mrudangas, वीणाभि: by vinas, तथा and, पणवै: by panavas, भृशम् excessively, नादितां resounded, पृथिव्याम् on earth, अत्यर्थम् exceedingly, अनुत्तमाम् unsurpassed, ताम् that city.
1::5::19::दिवि in heaven, तपसा through austerities, अधिगतम् acquired, सिद्धानाम् by siddhas, विमानमिव like an aerialcar, सुनिवेशितवेश्मान्ताम् of perfectly constructed palaces, नरोत्तमसमावृताम् inhabited by noblest of men.
1::5::20::लघुहस्ता: sharphanded, विशारदा: skilled(in fight), ये who, विविक्तम् solitary person, अपरापरम् one who has no father or son, शब्दवेध्यम् following the sound, विततं च spreading over (the fleeing foe), बाणै: with arrows, न विध्यन्ति would not pierce, वने in the forest, नर्दताम् roaring, मत्तानाम् inebriated, सिंहव्याघ्रवराहाणाम् lions, tigers and boars, निशितै: with sharp, शस्त्रै: weapons, बलात् with the strength (of instruments), बाहुबलैरपि with the strength of arms as well, हन्तार: slayers, तादृशानाम् relating to those, महारथै: by maharathas, सहस्रै: in thousands, अभिपूर्णां filled, ताम् that, पुरीम् city of Ayodhya, तदा then, राजा दशरथ: king Dasaratha, आवासयामास inhabited.
1::5::21::अग्निमद्भि: by brahmins worshipping the  sacrificial fire, गुणवद्भि: endowed with virtues, वेदषडङ्गपारगै: versed in four vedas and six vedangas (branches of learning at the end of vedas), सहस्रदै: offering charity in thousands, सत्यरतै: devoted to truth, महात्मभि: by exceedingly wise, महर्षिकल्पै: resembling divine sages, केवलै: ऋषिभि: च by unique sages, द्विजोत्तमै: by excellent dwijas (brahmana, kshatriya and vaisyas), आवृताम् filled with, ताम् that Ayodhya.
