1::47::1::Deeply distressed Diti, having come to know that the embryo had been severed into seven pieces, humbly spoke to the unassailable Indra.
1::47::2::O Indra, Slayer of Balasura, because of my fault this embryo has been made into seven pieces and rendered useless. In this matter you have not committed any fault.  
1::47::3::This disaster to the embryo has happened contrary to expectations. Hence, I seek a favour from you. Let these seven pieces become seven guardians of marut regions (regions of the wind). 
1::47::4::O Son, all these seven are my sons of celestial beauty.They will become pesiding deities for Vata Skandha (divisions of wind) and let them be wellknown as maruts wandering in the universe.
1::47::5::Among them, one will move about in Brahmaloka, another in Indraloka, and the third, well known as vayu will move around in the sky.
1::47::6::O best of devatas by your command the other four sons will remain celestial, and will range about in four directions.
1::47::7::The thousandeyed Indra, slayer of Bala, on hearing Diti's words, addressed her with folded palms, saying:
1::47::8::Everything will, no doubt, happen the way you said. Your sons will wander about as celestial beings. Prosperity to you.
1::47::9::O Rama mother and sons having arrived at this conclusion in the tapovana  ascended to heaven with their desire fulfilled. This is what we have heard.
1::47::10::O Descendant of Kakustha (Rama) this is that country which was formerly inhabited by Indra. Here Indra  attended on Diti who achieved the fruit of her austerities.
1::47::11:: O Tiger among men (Rama) this highly virtuous and wellknown son named Vishala was born to Ikshvakus in Alambusa. Where, a city named Vishala was built. 
1::47::12::O Rama mighty Hemachandra was Vishala's son. Hemachandra's successor was the celebrated Suchandra.
1::47::13::O Rama son of Suchandra was Dhumraswa, wellknown Sanjaya was the son of Dhumraswa. 
1::47::14::Prosperous and powerful Sahadeva was Sanjaya's son. Highly virtuous Kusaswa was Sahadeva's son.
1::47::15::Brilliant and powerful Somadatta was Kusaswa's son. That Somadatta's son was Kakutstha is wellknown.
1::47::16:: Son of Ikshvakus, Sumati comparable to devatas, invincible and exceedingly energetic is still ruling this city.
1::47::17::By the grace of the Ikshvakus, all the kings of Vishala have been long lived and exalted, valiant and deeply religious.
1::47::18::O Rama we shall spend the right happily here. O Best among men On the tomorrow we see Janaka.
1::47::19::Having heard of the arrival of Viswamitra the celebrated Sumati, most brilliant chief of kings proceeded (to receive him).
1::47::20::Along with his spiritual preceptors and relatives he paid Viswamitra great respect, enquired his wellbeing and said:
1::47::21:: O Sage no one is more blessed than me since you have favoured me with your arrival in my country.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये बालकाण्डे सप्तचत्वारिंशस्सर्ग:।।Thus ends the fortyseventh sarga of Balakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
1::47::22::
