1::36::1::तस्मिन् मुनौ when that ascetic, उक्तवाक्ये had spoken the words, वीरौ two heroes, राघवलक्ष्मणौ Rama and Lakshmana, उभौ both, कथाम् story, प्रतिनन्द्य enjoying, मुनिपुङ्गवम् preeminent ascetic, ऊचतु: uttered.
1::36::2::ब्रह्मन् O Divine sage, धर्मयुक्तम् endowed with righteousness, परमम् supreme, इदम् this story, त्वया by you, कथितम् has been narrated, शैलराजस्य king of mountains Himavan's, ज्येष्ठाया: of the eldest, दुहितु: daughter's, दिव्यमानुषसम्भवम् happened in the celestial and  mortal world, विस्तरम् detailed story, वक्तुम् to tell, अर्हसि it is worthy of you, विस्तरज्ञ: असि  you are conversant with the details.
1::36::3::लोकपावनी purifying the worlds, केन हेतुना for what reason, त्रीन् three, पथ: paths, प्लावयेत् should be overflowing with waters? धर्मज्ञ O Knower of righteousness, त्रिपथगा Tripathaga (threeway flowing), गङ्गा Ganga, कै: by which,  कर्मभि: actions, अन्विता endowed with, त्रिषु लोकेषु in three worlds, सरिदुत्तमा excellent among rivers, विश्रुता well known. 
1::36::4::काकुत्स्थे when Rama, तथा ब्रुवति was thus speaking, तपोधन: sage with asceticism as his wealth, सर्वाम् entire, कथाम् story, निखिलेन completely, ऋषिमध्ये amidst sages, न्यवेदयत् revealed.
1::36::5::राम O Rama, पुरा in ancient times, कृतोद्वाह: got married, महातपा: mighty ascetic, नीलकण्ठ: lord Siva, देवीम् goddess, Uma, दृष्ट्वा having seen, स्पृहया with intense desire, मैथुनाय for enjoying marital bliss, उपचक्रमे commenced.
1::36::6::परन्तप O Tormentor of enemies, राम O Rama, देवस्य of the lord, शितिकण्ठस्य Siva's, दिव्यम् celestial, वर्षशतम् hundred years, गतम् was over, अपि च even then, तस्याम् in her  (the womb of goddess Parvati), तनय: son, न आसीत् was not born.
1::36::7::तत: then, पितामहपुरोगमा: with Brahma in the forefront, देवा: devatas, इह here, now in this goddess, यत् which, भूतम् offspring, उत्पद्यते will be born, तत् that, क: who, प्रतिसहिष्यते will be able to bear, समुद्विग्ना: were exceedingly alarmed.
1::36::8::सुरा: devatas, सर्वे all, अभिगम्य approaching Siva, प्रणिपत्य paying obeisance, इदम् these words, अब्रुवन् spoke, देवदेव O God of devatas, अस्य लोकस्य for this world, हिते रत engaged in doing welfare of all, महादेव O Mahadeva, सुराणाम् for celestials, प्रणिपातेन with salutations, प्रसादम् mercy, कर्तुम् अर्हसि capable of doing it.
1::36::9::सुरोत्तम O Best among gods, तव your, तेज: energy, लोका: worlds, न धारयिष्यन्ति cannot contain, ब्राह्मेण in conformity vedas, तपसा by yogic penance, युक्त: endowed with, देव्या सह in the company with Parvati, तप: austerities, चर engage yourself,  त्रैलोक्यहितकामार्थम् with the intention of doing welfare for three worlds, तेज: energy, तेजसि in your energy, धारय retain.
1::36::10::सर्वलोकमहेश्वर: ruler of all the worlds, देवतानाम् devata's, वच: words, श्रुत्वा having heard, बाढम् Be it so, इति thus, अब्रवीत् said, पुनश्च again, एवम् these words, उवाच ह spoke.
1::36::11::उमया सह together with Uma, अहम् I, तेज: vital fluid, तेजस्येव in my energy (body), धारयिष्यामि I shall preserve, त्रिदशा: devatas, पृथिवी चैव earth also, निर्वाणम् peace, अधिगच्छतु obtain.
1::36::12::मम my , अनुत्तमम् excellent, यत् इदम् तेज: if this vital fluid, स्थानात् from its own place, क्षुभितम् is shaken, तत् then, क: who, धारयिष्यति will contain? सुरसत्तमा: best of devatas, मे to me, ब्रुवन्तु tell.
1::36::13::एवम् उक्ता: having been addressed in this way by Iswara, सुरा: सर्वे all devatas, वृषभध्वजम् having flagstaff with bull as his symbol (Iswara), प्रत्यूचु: replied, यत् तेज: that vital fluid, क्षुभितम् disturbed, एतत् thist one, धरा earth, धारयिष्यति will contain.
1::36::14::एवम् उक्त: having been spoken in this way by devatas, सुरपति: lord of devatas, येन तेजसा by which vital fluid, सगिरिकानना including mountains, forests, पृथिवी earth, व्याप्ता was pervaded, महीतले on the earth, प्रमुमोच released.
1::36::15::तत: then, अथ thereafter, देवा: devatas, पुन: again, हुताशनम् fire deity, इदम् these words, ऊचु: spoke, त्वम् you, वायुसमन्वित: followed by wind god, रौद्रम् relating to Rudra, महातेज: mighty energy (creative power), प्रविश enter.
1::36::16::अग्निना by fire, व्याप्तम् pervaded, तत् that energy, पुन: again, श्वेतपर्वत: celestial white mountain, सञ्जात: became, पावकादित्यसन्निभम् resplendent as fire or Sun, दिव्यम् celestial, शरवणं चैव became forest of reeds, यत्र in which, महातेजा: glorious, अग्निसम्भव: born from fire, कार्तिकेय: son of Krittika, Kartikeya, जात: was born.
1::36::17::अथ thereafter, सर्षिगणा: with multitude of saints, देवा: devatas, तत: for that event, सुप्रीतमनस: with highly pleased minds, तदा then, उमां च goddess Uma, शिवं चैव Shiva, अत्यर्थम् with great desire, पूजयामासु: worshipped.
1::36::18::राम Rama, अथ thereafter, शैलसुता daughter of mountain Himavan, समन्यु: with anger, त्रिदशान् addressing devatas, इदम् these words, अब्रवीत् spoke, क्रोधसंरक्तलोचना with reddened eyes because of anger, सर्वान् all of them, अशपत् cursed.
1::36::19::यस्मात् for the reason, पुत्रकाम्यया with a desire to bear son, सङ्गति: union with Mahadeva, निवारिता is prevented, तस्मात् for that reason, स्वेषु in your, दारेषु wives, अपत्यम् progeny, नोत्पादयिष्यथ you will not produce.
1::36::20::अद्यप्रभृति from today onwards, युष्माकम् your, पत्नय: wives, अप्रजा: childless, सन्तु  may become, सर्वान् all, सुरान् devatas, एवम् in this way, उत्त्वा having spoken, पृथिवीमपि Earth also, शशाप cursed.
1::36::21::अवने O Earth, त्वम् you, नैकरूपा do not assume one single form, बहुभार्या as wife of many masters, भविष्यसि you will become, सुदुर्मेधे O evil minded one, मम for me, पुत्रम् son, अनिच्छती is not to your liking, त्वम् you, मत्क्रोधकलुषीकृता fouled as as result of my anger,  पुत्रकृताम् on account of a son, प्रीतिं च pleasure also, न प्राप्स्यसि you will not obtain.
1::36::22::सुरपति: Mahesvara, तदा then, व्रीडितान् filled with humility, तान् सर्वान् all those, सुरान् devatas, दृष्ट्वा having seen, वरुणपालिताम् presided over by Varuna (Western direction), दिशम् direction, गमनाय to depart, उपचक्राम commenced.
1::36::23::महेश्वर: Mahesvara, गिरौ गत्वा having gone to the (himavat) mountain, तस्य (गिरेः) of that Himavat mountain's, उत्तरे in the  northern, पार्श्वे side, हिमवत्प्रभवे born in the Himavat mountain, शृङ्गे on a peak, देव्या सह along with goddess Uma, तप: yogic practices, अतिष्ठत् performed.
1::36::24::राम O Rama, शैलपुत्र्या: relating to the daughter of Himavat mountain, Uma, एष: विस्तर: this extensive story, ते to you, (कथित: has been narrated), गङ्गाया: च relating to Ganga,  प्रभवम् her birth, निवेदित: described, सह लक्ष्मण: together with Lakshmana, श्रुणु listen.
