2::26::1::राजसुतः prince, रामः Rama, मात्रा by mother, कृतस्वस्त्ययन: having been greeted with benedictory rites, कौशल्याम् to Kausalya, अभिवाद्य च after paying obeisance, धर्मिष्ठे in the righteous, वर्त्मनि on the path, स्थितः fixed, वनम् to the forest, सम्प्रस्थितः set out, नरैः (जनैः) by the people, वृतम् surrounded with, राजमार्गम् highway, विराजयन् illuminating (with his lustre), गुणवत्तया by excellent virtues, जनस्य people's, हृदयानि hearts, अममन्थेव मपहीला् (stirred).
2::26::2::तपस्विनी engaged in religious austerities (for consecration), वैदेही चापि Sita also, तत्सर्वम् all that, न शुश्राव did not hear, तस्याः her, हृदि in heart, तत् that, अभिषेचनम् एव  only consecration (was reflecting).
2::26::3::कृतज्ञा grateful (to god), राजधर्माणाम् duties of a king (palace rituals), अभिज्ञा experienced in, हृष्टचेतना with pleased mind, स्वयम् herself, देवकार्यम् worship of gods, कृत्वा having made,  राजपुत्रम् prince, प्रतीक्षते was awaiting.
2::26::4::अथ thereafter, रामस्तु Rama, ह्रिया with embarrassment, किञ्चित् a little, अवाङ्मुखः with his head bent down, प्रहृष्टजनसम्पूर्णम् thronged with excited people, सुविभूषितम् welldecorated, स्वं वेश्म his own residence, प्रविवेश entered.
2::26::5::अथ thereafter, सीता Sita, समुत्पत्य entering suddenly, वेपमाना च a trembling, शोकसन्तप्तम् distressed with grief, चिन्ताव्याकुलितेन्द्रियम् senses agitated due to anxiety, तं पतिम् her husband, अपश्यत् beheld.
2::26::6::धर्मात्मा virtuous, सः that, राघवः son of the Raghus (Rama), ताम् her, दृष्ट्वा having seen, मनोगतम् in mind, तं शोकम् that sorrow, सोढुम् to endure (control), न शशाक was not able, ततः for that reason, विवृतताम् गतः manifested.
2::26::7::विवर्णवदनम् pale face, प्रस्विन्नम् heavily perspiring, अमर्षणम् indignant, तम् him, दृष्ट्वा having seen, दुःखाभिसन्तप्ता  consumed with grief, आह uttered, प्रभो O Lord, इदानीम् now, इदम् this, किम् what?
2::26::8::राघव O scion of the Raghu race, अद्य today, श्रीमान् auspicious one, बार्हस्पतः with Brihaspati presiding over, पुष्यः Pushya star, युक्तः as suitable, प्राज्ञैः by learned ones, ब्राह्मणैः by brahmins, प्रोच्यते is declared, त्वम् you, केन for what reason, दुर्मनाः असि are dejected?
2::26::9::वल्गु charming, ते your, वदनम् face, शत शलाकेन with a hundred ribs, जलफेननिभेन (white) like foam in water, छत्रेण by umbrella, आवृतम् having been covered, न विराजते does not shine. 
2::26::10::शतपत्रनिभेक्षणम् eyes resembling lotus, तव आननम् your face, चन्द्रहंस प्रकाशाभ्याम् with the glow of the moon or swan, मुख्याभ्याम् by the excellent, व्यजनाभ्याम् with fans, न वीज्यते is not being fanned.
2::26::11::नरर्षभ O best among men वाग्मिन: eloquent men, वन्दिनश्चापि panegyrists, सूतमागधाः charioteers and bards, प्रहृष्टाः delighted, त्वाम् you, मङ्गलैः with auspicious words, स्तुवन्तः praising, अत्र here, न दृश्यन्ते are not seen.
2::26::12::वेदपारगाः versed in the Vedas, ब्राह्मणाः brahmins, मूर्धाभिषिक्तस्य having been consecrated,   ते your, मूर्ध्नि on head, विधानतः conforming to rites, क्षौद्रं च honey also, दधि च curds, न ददति स्म did not sprinkle.
2::26::13::सर्वाः all, प्रकृतयः ministers, श्रेणीमुख्याश्च also the heads of guilds, तथा also, पौरजानपदाः citizens of towns and villages, भूषिताः adorned, त्वाम् you, अनुव्रजितुम् to follow, न इच्छन्ति do not seek.
2::26::14::वेगसम्पन्नैः running swiftly, काञ्चनभूषितैः decorated with gold, चतुर्भिः four, हयैः horses, युक्तः harnessed, मुख्यः important, पुष्यरथः ceremonial chariot, किम् why, ते अग्रतः preceding you, न गच्छति is not going.
2::26::15::वीर O valiant one, तव your, प्रयाणे in your journey, अग्रतः in front, लक्षणपूजितः endowed with good features and revered, कृष्णमेघगिरिप्रभः with the lustre of a dark cloud or a  mountain, श्रीमान् auspicious one, हस्ती an elephant, न लक्ष्यते is not seen. 
2::26::16::वीर O heroic one, प्रियदर्शन O one with a pleasant countenance, काञ्चनचित्रम् carved in gold, ते to you, भद्रासनम् throne, पुरस्कृत्य keeping in front of, यान्तम् proceeding, पुरस्कृतम् keeping in front, न च पश्यामि I do not see.
2::26::17::अभिषेकः consecration, यथा as, सज्जः arranged, तव your, मुखवर्णः complexion of your face, अपूर्वः unusual, प्रहर्षश्च delightful, न लक्ष्यते not seen, इदानीम् now, इदम् this, किम् why? 
2::26::18::इतीव in this way, विलपन्तीम् lamenting, ताम् to her, रघुनन्दनः Rama, प्रोवाच said , सीते O Sita, तत्रभवान् venerable, तातः father, माम् me, वनम् to the forest, प्रव्राजयति  banishing.
2::26::19::महति in a noble, कुले family, सम्भूते born in, धर्मज्ञे knower of righteousness, धर्मचारिणि for an observer of righteousness, जानकि Sita, येन क्रमेण in such course, इदम् this, अभ्यागतम् has befallen, शृण listen.
2::26::20::राज्ञा by the king, सत्यप्रतिज्ञेन true to his promise, पित्रा my father, दशरथेन by Dasaratha, पुरा earlier, मम मात्रे to my mother, कैकेय्यै to Kaikeyi, महावरौ two great boons, दत्तौ were given.
2::26::21::अद्य now, नृपोद्यते the king was getting ready, मम my, अस्मिन् अभिषेके for this consecration, सज्जे in the preparation, तया by her, सः that, समयः promise, प्रचोदितः was urged, धर्मेण in the name of righteousness, प्रतिनिर्जितः has been conquered.
2::26::22::मया by me, चतुर्दश वर्षाणि fourteen years, दण्डके in Dandaka forest, वस्तव्यम् am to dwell, मे पित्रा by my father, भरतश्चापि Bharata also, यौवराज्ये as heirapparent,  नियोजितः has been appointed.
2::26::23::विजनम् desolate, वनम् forest, प्रस्थितः set to depart, सः अहम् such me, त्वाम् you, द्रष्टुम् to see, आगतः I have come, भरतस्य Bharata's, समीपे in the presence of, कदाचन at any time, अहम् I, न कथ्यः not to be told , बुद्धियुक्ताः intellectuals, पुरुषाः men, परस्तवम् praising others , न सहन्ते हि cannot endure, तस्मात् for that reason, भरतस्य Bharata's, अग्रतः infront of, ते those, मम गुणाः my virtues, न कथ्याः should not be mentioned.
2::26::24::त्वम् you, तेन by him, कदाचन at any time, विशेषेण with a special treatment, न भर्तव्या  should not be supported, अनुकूलतया तु by being favourable only, अस्य his, समीपे in his vicinity, वर्तितुम् to remain, शक्यम् is possible.
2::26::25::नृपतिना by the king, तस्मै for him, सनातनम् perpetual, यौवराज्यम् regency, दत्तम् given, सीते O Sita, सः he, त्वया by you, प्रसाद्यः has to be pleased, नृपतिश्च king also, विशेषतः especially.
2::26::26::अहं चापि I also, गुरोः father's, तां प्रतिज्ञाम् that promise, समनुपालयन् while fulfilling, अद्यैव now itself, वनम् to the forest, यास्यामि shall go, मनस्विनि highminded, Sita, त्वम् you, स्थिरा भव keep steady.
2::26::27::अनघे O sinless one, कल्याणि O auspicious one, मयि me, मुनिनिषेवितम् inhabited by ascetics, वनम् to the forest, याते when I am gone, त्वया by you, व्रतोपवास परया engaged in vratas and fasting, भवितव्यम् should be done.
2::26::28::काल्यम् fimely, उत्थाय rising, यथाविधि according to the prescribed rituals, देवानाम् of the gods, पूजाम् कृत्वा having worshipped, मम पिता my father, नरेश्वरः lord of the people, दशरथः to Dasaratha, वन्दितव्यः is worthy of homage (by you).
2::26::29::सन्तापकर्शिता emaciated due to grief, वृद्धा aged, मम माता च my mother, कौशल्या Kausalya, धर्ममेव duty only, अग्रतः कृत्वा placing ahead, त्वत्तः by you, सम्मानम् respect, अर्हति  deserves.
2::26::30::शेषाः the rest of them, या मम मातरः my mothers, ते to you also, नित्यम् always, वन्दितव्याः should be respected, मम my, मातरः mothers, स्नेहप्रणय सम्भोगैः with love, affection and service, समाः हि are equal.
2::26::31::मम to me, प्राणैः  more than life , प्रियतरौ dearer, भरतशत्रुघ्नौ Bharata and Satrughna, विशेषतः specially, त्वया by you, भ्रातृपुत्रसमौ as your brother and your sons, द्रष्टव्यौ च are to be looked after.
2::26::32::कदाचन at any time, भरतस्य of Bharata, विप्रियम् disagreeable, न कर्तव्यम् should not be done, सः he, देशस्य च of the country, कुलस्य च of the family also, राजा king, प्रभुश्चैव  also the lord.
2::26::33::राजान: kings, शीलेन with good conduct, आराधिताः are gratified, प्रयत्नैः with endeavours, उपसेविताः having been served, सम्प्रसीदन्ति are satisfied, विपर्यये in contrary to that, कुप्यन्तिच are also enraged.
2::26::34::नराधिपाः kings, अहितकारिणः harmful men, औरसान् पुत्रानपि even their own sons, त्यजन्ति will abandon, समर्थान् capable men, जनानपि even other people, सम्प्रगृह्णन्ति accept.
2::26::35::कल्याणि O auspicious one, सा त्वम् so you, राज्ञः of the king, भरतस्य of  Bharata, समनुवर्तिनी an obedient lady, धर्मे in righteousness, रता absorbed one, सत्यव्रत परायणा following the truth and the vows, इह वस live here.
2::26::36::प्रिये O beloved one, भामिनि beauty (Sita), अहम् I, महावनम् to the great forest, गमिष्यामि I am going, त्वया by you, इहैव here itself, कस्यचित् to any one, यथा in any way, व्यलीकम् harm, न कुरुषे would not do, तथा in that way, वस्तव्यम् you shall live here, मम my, इदं वचः these words, कार्यम् should be done.
2::26::37::राजसुतः prince, रामः Rama, मात्रा by mother, कृतस्वस्त्ययन: having been greeted with benedictory rites, कौशल्याम् to Kausalya, अभिवाद्य च after paying obeisance, धर्मिष्ठे in the righteous, वर्त्मनि on the path, स्थितः fixed, वनम् to the forest, सम्प्रस्थितः set out, नरैः (जनैः) by the people, वृतम् surrounded with, राजमार्गम् highway, विराजयन् illuminating (with his lustre), गुणवत्तया by excellent virtues, जनस्य people's, हृदयानि hearts, अममन्थेव मपहीला् (stirred).
