2::85::1::एवम् thus, उक्तः having spoken, महाप्राज्ञः  great intellectual, भरतः Bharata, निषादाधिपतिम् the overlord of the nishadas, गुहम् Guha, हेत्वर्थसंहितम् in well thought out and significant, वाक्यम् words, प्रत्युवाच replied. 
2::85::2::मम my, गुरोः elder brother's, सखे friend, यः त्वम् you, एकः alone, ईदृशीम् this large, सेनाम् army, अभ्यर्चितुम् to extend hospitality, इच्छसि want, ते your, कृतः done, कामः desire, ऊर्जितः खलु is indeed great. 
2::85::3::महातेजाः of great radiance, श्रीमान् the majestic one, भरतः Bharata, गुहम् to Guha, उत्तमम् courteous, वचनम् word, उक्त्वा तु having said, पुनः again, निषादाधिपतिम्  addressing king of the nishadas, अब्रवीत् said. 
2::85::4::गुह Guha, कतरेण by which path, भरद्वाजाश्रमम् to the hermitage of Bharadwaja, गमिष्यामि can I go, गङ्गनूपः marshy banks of Ganga, अयम् this, देशः region, भृशम् highly, गहनः is dense, दुरत्ययः very difficult to traverse.
2::85::5::धीमतः of the sagacious, तस्य राजपुत्रस्य of that king's son, तत् वचनम् those words, श्रुत्वा having heard, गहनगोचरः one who ranges in the dense forest, गुहः Guha, प्राञ्जलिः with folded palms (in reverence), वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवीत् spoke. 
2::85::6::महायशः a man of great renown, राजपुत्रः king's son, धन्विनः armed with bows, दाशाः fishermen, सुसमाहिताः wellprepared, त्वा you, अनुगमिष्यन्ति shall follow, अहम् I, त्वा you, अनुगमिष्यामि shall follow. 
2::85::7::अक्लिष्टकर्मणः of unwearied actions, रामस्य towards Rama, दुष्टः bearing illwill, न व्रजसि कच्छित् are you not going to that place?, महती large, ते your, इयं सेना this army, मे to me, शङ्काम् doubt, जनयतीव as though arouses.
2::85::8::आकाशः इव like the sky, निर्मलः tranquil, भरतः Bharata, एवम् thus, अभिभाषन्तम् talking, तं गुहम् addressing Guha, श्लक्ष्णया in gentle, वाचा voice, वचनम् words, अब्रवीत् said. 
2::85::9::यत् which, कष्टम् calamity, सः कालः that time, मा भूत् shall not come, माम् to me, शङ्कितुम् to suspect, नार्हसि you should not, मे my, ज्येष्ठः eldest, भ्राता brother, सः राघवः that Rama, पितृसमः is equal to my father, मतः हि he has been held in high esteem.     
2::85::10::वनवासिनम् residing in the forest, तम् काकुत्स्थम् to that scion of the Kakutsthas, निवर्तयितुम् to bring back, यामि I am going, गुह O Guha, ते to you, अन्या other, बुद्धि: thought, न कार्या not to be entertained, ते to you, सत्यम् truth, ब्रवीमि I am telling. 
2::85::11::भरतभाषितम् Bharata's words, श्रुत्वा on hearing, संहृष्टवदनः one whose is face beaming with joy, सः तु that Guha, हर्षितः delighted, भरतं प्रति looking at Bharata, पुनरेव once  again, वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवीत् said. 
2::85::12::यः त्वम् such a man as you are, इह now, अयत्नात् effortlessly, आगतम् arrived, राज्यम् kingdom, त्यक्तुम् to renounce, इच्छसि wish, त्वम् you, धन्यः are blessed, त्वया your, तुल्यम् equal, जगतीतले on this earth, न पश्यामि I do not see.
2::85::13::यः त्वम् you, कृच्छ्रगतम् who is in great difficulty, रामम् Rama, प्रत्यानयितुम् to bring back, इच्छसि desire, ते your, शाश्वती everlasting, कीर्तिः fame, लोकान् in this world, अनुचरिष्यति will spread.
2::85::14::तदा then, गुहस्य Guha's, एवं thus, भरतं to Bharata, सम्भाषमाणस्य while conversing, सूर्यः sun, नष्टप्रभः diminished light, बभौ shone, रजनी च night, अभ्यवर्तत set in.
2::85::15::श्रीमान् fortunate Bharata, सः he, तां सेनां that army, सन्निवेश्य having encamped, गुहेन with Guha, परितोषितः gratified, शत्रुघ्नेन सह along with Satrughna, शयनं sleep, समुपागमत्  obtained.
2::85::16::महात्मनः of the magnanimous, धर्मप्रेक्षस्य of a man of righteous outlook, अनर्हस्य of him who  does not deserve (grief), भरतस्य Bharata's, तादृशः such, रामचिन्तामयः filled with the thought of Rama, शोकः grief, उपस्थितः हि had befallen.
2::85::17::वनदाहाभिसन्तप्तं dried by forest fire, पादपं tree, गूढः hidden, अग्निरिव like a fire, राघवम्  Bharata, दहनः grief, अन्तर्दाहेन burning within himself, सन्तापयति scorching.
2::85::18::सूर्यांशुसन्तप्तः heated by the Sun's rays, हिमवान् Himalayas, यथा just as, हिमं ice, प्रसृतः melted, सर्वगात्रेभ्यः from all limbs, शोकाग्निसम्भवम् caused by the fire of grief, स्वेदम् sweat, प्रसृतः poured out.
2::85::19::कैकयीसुतः Kaikeyi's son, ध्याननिर्धरशैलेन by the cavityless rocks of that mountain of contemplation, विनिःश्वसितधातुना by the minerals of heaving sighs, दैन्यपादपसंघेन by the multitude of trees in the form of dejection, शोकायासाधिशृङ्गिणा by the peaks of  sorrow fatigue and mental distress, प्रमोहानन्तसत्त्वेन by the countless creatures of stupor, सन्तापौषधिवेणुना by the bamboo tree of sorrow, महता great, दुःखशैलेन by the mountains of grief, आक्रान्तः was invaded.
2::85::20::ततः then, नरर्षभः best among men (Bharata), विनिश्श्वसन् heaving sighs, भृशदुर्मनाः with greatly distraught mind, प्रमूढसंज्ञः with bewildered senses, परमापदं a great calamity, गतः caught, हृदयज्वरार्दितः oppressed by the fever raging his heart, यूथहतः separated from the herd, ऋषभः यथा like a bull, शमं peace of mind, न लेभे  did not get. 
2::85::21::महानुभावः magnanimous, सजनः along with his people, भरतः Bharata, समाहितः with a composed mind, गुहेन सार्धं with Guha, समागतः joined, तदा then, सुदुर्मनाः with greatly distraught mind, गुहः Guha, तं भरतम् that Bharata, पुनः again, अग्रजं प्रति about elder brother Rama, आश्वासयत् consoled. 
