2::49::1::पुरुषव्याघ्रः foremost  among men, रामोऽपि Rama also, पितुः father's, आज्ञाम् command,  अनुस्मरन् recollecting, तेन by that, रात्रिशेषेणैव in the remaining part of the night, महत् vast, अन्तरम् distance, जगाम covered.
2::49::2::तस्य for him, तथा in that manner, गच्छतः एव thus travelling, शिवा auspicious, रजनी night, व्यपायात् ended, (सः he), शिवाम् auspicious, सन्ध्याम् sandhya (morning twilight), उपास्य having worshipped, विषयान्तम् frontiers of the country, व्यगाहत reached.
2::49::3::विकृष्टसीमान्तान् ploughed outskirts, ग्रामान् villages, पुष्पितानि flowered, वनानि च forests, पश्यन् seeing, ग्रामसंवासवासिनाम् living in the midst of villages, मनुष्याणाम् of the people, वचः discussions, शृण्वन् hearing, हयोत्तमैः on those excellent horses, शीघ्रम् quickly travelling, शनैरिव as if going slowly, अतिययौ went a long distance.
2::49::4::कामस्य to passion, वशमागतम् overtaken by, राजानम् king, दशरथम् Dasaratha, धिक् fie on him, हा what a pity, नृशंसा wicked, पापा sinful, कैकेयी Kaikeyi, अद्य now, पापानुबन्धिनी is committed to sins, या that Kaikeyi, धार्मिकम् righteous, महाप्राज्ञम् sagacious,  सानुक्रोशम् full of compassion, जितेन्द्रियम् one who has control over his senses, ईदृशम् such a person, राज्ञः पुत्रम् king's son, वनवासे to dwell in the forest, प्रवासयति has  banished, तीक्ष्णा cruel, सम्भिन्नमर्यादा breaking all limits of decency, तीक्ष्णकर्मणि in an  extremely cruel act, वर्तते is committed.
2::49::5::महाभागा highly fortunate, जनकनन्दिनी Janaka's daughter, सदा always, सुखेषु in luxury, अभिरता always attached, सीता  Sita, कथं नाम how, दुःखानि discomforts, अनुभविष्यति will experience.
2::49::6::राजा king, दशरथः Dasaratha, स्वसुतम् own son, प्रजानाम् of the subjects, प्रियम् dear, अनघम् sinless, रामम् Rama, निस्नेहः without affection, इह here, परित्यक्तुम् to abandon, इच्छति wishes, अहो alas
2::49::7::वीरः valiant, कोसलेश्वरः lord of Kosala Rama, ग्रामसंवासवासिनाम् living in villages and hamlets, मनुष्याणाम् people's, एताः these, वाचः words, शृण्वन् while listening, कोसलान्  boundaries of Kosala kingdom, अति ययौ crossed.
2::49::8::ततः thereafter, शिववारिवहाम् carrying the auspicious waters, वेदश्रुतिं नाम by name Vedasruti, नदीम् river, उत्तीर्य having crossed, अगस्त्याध्युषिताम् where Agastya was  residing, दिशम् quarter, अभिमुखः in the direction of, प्रायात् went.
2::49::9::ततः then, सुचिरं कालम् for a long time, गत्वा having travelled, शीत जलाम् of cool waters, गोयुतानूपाम् cows abounding in marshy areas, सागरङ्गमाम् flowing into the sea, गोमतीम्  Gomati, नदीम् river, अतरत् crossed.
2::49::10::राघवः Rama, शीघ्रगैः with swiftmoving, हयैः with horses, गोमतीं चापि Gomati river also, अतिक्रम्य having crossed, मयूरहंसाभिरुताम् echoed with the cries of peacocks and swans,  स्यन्दिकाम् नदीम् river Syandika, ततार crossed.
2::49::11::सः रामः that Rama, पुरा formerly, राज्ञा by the king, मनुना by Manu, इक्ष्वाकवे to Ikshvaku, दत्ताम् bestowed, स्फीताम् vast tracts, राष्ट्रावृताम् encircled by  kingdoms, महीम् land, वैदेहीम् to Sita, अन्वदर्शयत् showed.
2::49::12::हंसमत्तस्वरः resembling the intoxicated voice of swans, पुरुषर्षभः the best among men, श्रीमान् graceful, सूत इत्येव O charioteer saying so, तं सारथिम् that charioteer, अभीक्ष्णश: repeatedly, आभाष्य having uttered, उवाच said.
2::49::13::अहम् I, पुनः again, आगम्य having returned, मात्रा with mother, पित्रा च also with father, सङ्गतः united with, सरय्वा: Sarayu river's, पुष्पिते blossoming, वने groves, मृगयाम् hunting, कदा when, पर्यटिष्यामि I shall roam about.
2::49::14::एषा this hunting, लोके in this world, अतुला incomparable, राजर्षिगणसम्मता is accepted by royal sages, रतिर्हि is delightful (sport indeed), सरयूवने in the Sarayu forest of, मृगयाम् hunting, अत्यर्थम् greatly, नाभिकाङ्क्षामि do not desire.
2::49::15::अस्मिन् in this, लोके world, वने in the woods, मृगया hunting, राजर्षीणाम् of royal sages, रत्यर्थं हि is for their pleasure, मनुजैः by people, काले in appropriate times, कृताम् is undertaken, धन्विनाम् for the bowmen, अभिकाङ्क्षिताम् a sought after one, ताम् that (hunting I do not seek.)
2::49::16::सः ऐक्ष्वाकः that descendant of Ikshvaku, Rama, तम् that, सूतम् to charioteer, मधुरया in sweet, गिरा words, तम् तम् these and other, अर्थम् thoughts, अभिप्रेत्य regarding, वाक्यम् words, उदीरयन् pronouncing, अध्वानम् the path, ययौ went (covered).
