2::82::1::Sagacious Bharata beheld that assembly hall filled with honourable members, like the fullmoon beholds the night stretching forth (with stars).
2::82::2::When the seats were occupied by the honourable members according to their rank, that august assembly looked splendid with the brilliance of their apparels and fragrance of unguents. 
2::82::3::The most splendid assembly filled with learned people looked brilliant like the night with the autumnal fullmoon. 
2::82::4::The chief priest Vasistha, knower of righteousness, looked at all the ministers present and addressed Bharata in a gentle voice. 
2::82::5::O dear child following the righteous path king Dasaratha conferred on you this vast kingdom abounding in wealth and grains before attaining heaven.
2::82::6::Abiding in truth, remembering the righteous ways of virtuous men just as the rising Moon does not leave its beams, Rama too did not move away from his father's command.
2::82::7::The kingdom free from obstacles has been passed on to you by your father and brother. Get yourself coronated quickly and enjoy it along with your cheerful ministers.
2::82::8:: Let kings from the north, the west, the south, the bordering kingdoms, and the seatraders offer you crores of gems as gifts.
2::82::9::On hearing those words, Bharata who knew his duty was overwhelmed with distress and, resolved to abide by righteousness, reached Rama through his mind (thought of Rama).
2::82::10::Young Bharata with the melodious voice of a swan, choked with tears, lamenting in the assembly, reproached the family priest Vasistha, saying:
2::82::11:: Would any man seize this kingdom which rightfully belongs to sagacious Rama, who practises brahmacharya, who is wellversed in all branches of learning and who endeavours to protect righteousness?
2::82::12::How can any usurper of the kingdom be born of Dasaratha? Or, how would any progeny of Dasaratha become the usurper of the kingdom? I and the kingdom, both belong to Rama. You should tell the truth about this.
2::82::13::The eldest, eminent and righteous Rama, the scion of the Kakutstha dynasty, who is comparable to Dilipa and Nahusha deserves to inherit this kingdom just as Dasaratha did.
2::82::14:: If I commit this evil act followed by wretched people which would not lead any one to  heaven, I shall only be bringing disgrace to the kings of the Ikshvaku dynasty.  
2::82::15::I will never accept the evil deed committed by my mother. From here itself I shall pay obeisance with folded palms to my brother who dwells in the impenetrable forest.   
2::82::16:: I shall follow Rama the best among men. He alone and no one else deserves to rule over the kingdom of the three worlds. 
2::82::17::Hearing the words of Bharata full of righteousness, all the men assembled there   shed tears of joy, thinking of Rama.
2::82::18::If I am not able to bring back my noble brother (Rama) from the forest, I shall also dwell there like my noble brother Lakshmana. 
2::82::19::I shall employ all possible means to bring him back and join you who are respectable, virtuous and pious.
2::82::20::I have already despatched the explorers and protectors of roads who work for wages and without wages as well. It also pleases me to undertake this journey.
2::82::21::Righteous Bharata who was full of devotion towards his brother having uttered thus, addressed  the skilful counsellor Sumantra standing nearby:     
2::82::22:: O Sumantra quickly rise and go. On my authority, order the expedition and let the army be marshalled at once.
2::82::23::On hearing the words of the magnanimous Bharata, Sumantra was delighted and as  instructed, ordered everything as if he was anxious to do it himself.
2::82::24:: Having come to know that orders were issued to send the army on an expedition to bring back Rama, the subjects and the army chiefs were delighted.
2::82::25::Then, the wives of the soldiers having come to know of the expedition were all delighted and in every household hastened up their husbands.
2::82::26::Those chiefs of the army urged the soldiers, horses, fastmoving bullockcarts and swift chariots (to move on). 
2::82::27::When Bharata saw that the army was ready, he instructed Sumantra who was standing by the side of the preceptor to quickly prepare his chariot. 
2::82::28:: He (Sumantra) received the command of Bharata in great delight and set out with a chariot harnessed with excellent horses.
2::82::29::Bharata, a descendant of the Raghu race, firm in truth, one whose valour comes out of unswerving truth, speaking judiciously said this to propitiate his esteemed brother who was in the dense forest:
2::82::30:: O Sumantra, arise, go at once to the leaders of the army and ask them to assemble the troops. I shall propifiate Rama who is in the deep forest and bring him back for the welfare of the world.
2::82::31::The charioteer categorically commanded by Bharata, his desire fulfilled, communicated the royal mandate to all important subjects, chiefs of army and friends.
2::82::32::Thereafter, men from every household, kshatriyas, vaisyas, sudras and brahmins came out and harnessed their chariots to the camels and asses, elephants and horses of high pedigree.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्व्यशीतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eightysecond sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
