2::15::1:: The brahmins wellversed in the Vedas stayed waiting all night and assembled at the pavilion (for the consecration ceremony) along with royal priests.    
2::15::2:: For the consecration of the scion of the Raghu race (Rama), ministers, army chiefs and chiefs of merchants' associations assembled, brimming with joy. 
2::15::3::The best of brahmins had decided to perform the consecration ceremony after the  bright Sun appeared in the sky when the Pushya star approached the karkataka lagna, which was the constellation at the time of Rama's birth. 
2::15::4::Golden jars filled with water, the welldecorated throne and a chariot  spread well with  bright tigerskin (were kept ready).
2::15::5::Water had been fetched from the sacred confluence of Ganga and Yamuna, from other  holy streams, wells, ponds and lakes, from rivers flowing eastward, westward, and  zigzag, from rivers from all directions joined together. And from all the seas.
2::15::6:: Gold and silver vessels filled with holy water and puffed corn, adorned with lotuses, water lilies and leaves from trees rich in sap shone.
2::15::7::Honey, curd, ghee, puffed grain, darbha grass, flowers and milk were arranged. Wellmannered courtesans adorned with all kinds of ornaments (stood in position).
2::15::8::An excellent fan of yak's tail with a staff of gold  studded with gems looking like diffused moonbeams was kept ready. 
2::15::9::A lustrous pale white umbrella resembling the Moon's orb or the pole star was kept in front of the coronation pavilion. 
2::15::10::A bull and a horse both pale white and a majestic elephant in rut worthy of royal ride stood waiting.
2::15::11::Eight auspicious maidens adorned with all types of ornaments, all sorts of musical instruments, panegyrists and others (were in waiting).
2::15::12::Just as articles necessary for the consecration of the descendants of the Ikshvakus, are customarily arranged in the kingdom, in the same way things were arranged for the coronation of the prince belonging to that race. All those who had assembled there in response to the order of the king could not see him and so they said to themselves 'Who will inform the king of our arrival. Everything is kept ready for consecration of the sagacious Rama as prince regent. The Sun has risen. But we do not find the king'.
2::15::13::While the sovereign monarchs who hailed from different parts of the earth were thus talking Sumantra the king's confidant said:
2::15::14::In obedience to the king's command I am hurrying for Rama. All of you are honourable to king Dasaratha, especially to Rama.
2::15::15::On your behalf I shall enquire from the king who is awake now about his welfare and the reason for calling me here.
2::15::16::Having said so, Sumantra who was versed in history and tradition  approached the inner apartment which always remains closed.
2::15::17::Entering the king's inner apartment, he began extoling the virtues of the royal dynasty, and stood there as he approached the king's bedchamber.
2::15::18::Having approached the king's bedchamber Sumatra stood behind the screen, singing his glory and seeking the blessings (of God) on this son of Raghus dynasty. 
2::15::19::O scion of the kakutsthas (Dasaratha), may Moon and Sun, Siva and Kubera, Varuna, Agni and Indra grant you victory
2::15::20::The holy night has passed and the auspicious day has arrived. O tiger among kings,  awaken and attend to your duties.
2::15::21::O scion of the Raghu dynasty brahmins, army commanders and merchants have arrived and they beseech your audience. Please awake.
2::15::22::Dasaratha waking up saw the charioteer and expert counsellor Sumantra extoling him, and said:
2::15::23::You had been asked by her (Kaikeyi) to bring Rama here. What is the reason the command is disregarded?
2::15::24::I did not sleep (last night). Bring Rama here at once, said king Dasaratha to the charioteer again.
2::15::25::At these words of the king, he offered his salutations by bowing his head and left the king's apartment, reflecting on the great happy event.
2::15::26::The charioteer left cheerfully, happily looking at the highway bedecked with pennants and banners.
2::15::27::The charioteer heard the conversation relating to Rama and his consecration among the happy citizens.
2::15::28::Thereafter, Sumantra beheld the beautiful palace of Rama,  resembling  the abode of Indra or the peak of Kailasa in its splendour.
2::15::29::The charioteer (Sumantra) beheld Rama's palace closed with two heavypanelled doors. Adorned with hundreds of galleries, it had a peak mounted with golden idols. The arches were studded with different gems and corals. Bright like dense autumnal cloud, it shone like the cave of mount Meru. It was ornamented with excellent garlands and precious diamonds. Pearls were strewn around. Decorated with sandal and aloe wood, it emitted, like the peak of mount Dardura, captivating fragrance৷৷ Sarasas and peacocks were singing sweetly. The palace was full of skilfully carved images of deer and other embellishments. It attracted the minds and the eyes of all living beings with brilliant splendour. Resplendent like the Sun and the Moon, it looked like the abode of Kubera and a reflected image of the abode of Mahendra. It was crowded with birds of various kinds. In height it was equal to the peak of mount Meru. Villagers thronged the palace with gifts, eagerly waiting with folded hands to see the spectacle of Rama's coronation. Lofty, it looked like a vast cloud. Welldecked and filled with various gems, it was crowded with hunchbacks and kiratas (hunters) too.
2::15::30::Mounted on a chariot, attached with a fender and driven by horses, the charioteer advanced towards the royal palace of Rama delighting the minds of the people of the city.
2::15::31::Having reached the palace abounding in deer and peacocks which resembled the magnificent and opulent abode of Indra, the charioteer was thrilled at the allpervading beauty of the place befitting Rama.
2::15::32::Having entered the welldecorated palace which was (lofty) like Kailasa, he crossed the courtyards comparable to the abode of the celestials, passed through the many bosom friends of Rama and entered the private apartment. 
2::15::33::There he heard the happy words spoken by people about the enthronement of prince Rama and his future wellbeing.
2::15::34::Sumantra beheld Rama's palace which resembled the high summit of mount Meru shining with splendour. Filled with animals and birds, if looked like the abode of Indra.  
2::15::35::He saw villagers and others in crores and parardhas, leaving their chariots and thronging the gateway, (some) paying obeisance with folded palms and (some) carrying gifts in their hands.
2::15::36::He beheld a beautiful elephant named Satrunjaya with a huge body on which Rama was to mount. It looked like a vast mountain or a huge cloud. With ichor flowing from his temples and without caring for the goad, the elephant was intolerant.
2::15::37::Important ministers who were dear to the king and welladorned arrived there on their  horses, chariots and elephants. Sumantra finding his way through the crowd of the people who assembled on all sides, entered the glorious private apartment of Rama.
2::15::38::The palace looked like a mountain peak covered by a cloud and a great vimana surrounded by splendid apartments. The charioteer entered the palace unobstructed like a crocodile entering the ocean bristling with many gems.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चदशःसर्गः।।Thus ends the fifteenth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the  holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
