2::38::1:: Beholding Sita who was wearing a bark garment, like one without a support, though having a husband, all the people cried bitterly exclaiming O Dasaratha, fie on you.
2::38::2::Hearing that tumult the distressed Dasaratha lost faith in his own life and in his righteousness. 
2::38::3::The descendant of the Ikshvakus (Dasaratha), heaving hot sighs, said to his wife O Kaikeyi, Sita does not deserve to go (to the forest) in garment of kusa grass.
2::38::4::Sita a delicate, young princess accustomed to comforts is not fit to dwell in the forest. This is what my preceptor has truly spoken.
2::38::5::Sita, daughter of Janaka, the greatest among kings, stands amidst people wearing bark garment like an ascetic with her senses switched off. To whom and what harm has she done? 
2::38::6:: Let the daughter of Janaka take off her bark garments. This is not the promise I had made to you earlier. Let the princess happily go to the forest adorned with all jewels and with all other necessities. 
2::38::7:: By giving this cruel promise through importunity, I have rendered myself unfit to live. This promise was made as a child's play and it (now) destroys me like a bamboo destroyed by its own flowers. 
2::38::8::O sinful woman O wretch Rama might have done something unbecoming to you, but what offence has Sita committed?  
2::38::9::What wrong has the daughter of Janaka largeeyed like a doe, so gentle and worthy of compassion done to you? 
2::38::10::Rama's exile, O wicked woman, is enough for you. What are you committing further heinous crimes for? 
2::38::11::I have heard you, O Devi speaking to Rama when he came here in connection with the coronation. I promised you to that extent only. 
2::38::12::Having exceeded all that, you want to behold Sita in bark garment and thereby, wish for hell.
2::38::13::The king could not see any end to his lamentation. Immersed in the grief of separation from his son and deeply tormented, he fell down on the ground.  
2::38::14:: Rama who was about to leave for the forest addressed his father who sat with his head bent once again:
2::38::15::O righteous father O king my aged and illustrious mother, Kausalya possesses neither a mean character nor does she blame you.
2::38::16:: O bestower of boons,  separated from me and unaccustomed to suffering, she will be plunged into an unforeseen ocean of sorrow. You should pay her greater attention.
2::38::17::Let her not grieve on account of her son. O venerable father, if she, who deserves compassion is honoured by you, she will live. 
2::38::18::You are powerful like Indra.You should act accordingly so that my mother who has a possesive feeling towards her son should not, due to emaciation go to the abode of Yama after my departure for the forest. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyeighth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
