2::50::1::Having crossed the vast, beautiful kingdom of Kosala, the sagacious elder brother of Lakshmana stood facing Ayodhya with folded palms and said:
2::50::2::O Ayodhya, the best of cities ruled by those born in the Kakutstha race I take leave of you and of all those gods inhabiting and guarding you.
2::50::3::On completion of exile and my filial obligations to king Dasaratha, lord of the world, discharged, I shall, reunited with my parents, see you again.
2::50::4::He looked miserable, his copperred eyes filled with tears. He raised his right hand and said to the villagers who had come to see him: 
2::50::5:: You have aptly shown your kindness and compassion to me. It is not proper to prolong one's grief. So do go and altend to your duties. 
2::50::6::All of them paid their homage by circumambulating the highsouled Rama. Crying bitterly, they stood here and there. 
2::50::7::Not yet satisfied (they wanted to linger longer), they stood weeping, while Rama went out of sight just as the Sun disappears at nightfall.
2::50::8::Rama, the best  of men, crossed the auspicious land of Kosala which was worth seeing by kings. It looked charming with sacrificial posts and altars, pleasure gardens and mango groves and tanks filled with water. It was rich with herds of cattle, wealth and foodgrains. It was inhabited by charitable, contented and wellnourished people free from fear from any quarter. And it reverberated with the sounds of Vedic recitations. 
2::50::9::Rama, the greatest among those endowed with fortitude, travelled through the middle of the kingdom which was pleasing, prosperous and full of ravishing gardens fit to be enjoyed by kings.
2::50::10::There Rama saw the holy Ganga flowing in three (worlds) with her sacred waters, free from moss, and worshipped by sages.
2::50::11::The holy Ganga, adorned with graceful hermitages situated not far away is visited at times by delightful nymphs who sport in her lakes.
2::50::12::The Ganga is graced by devatas, danavas, gandharvas and kinneras. Wives of several gandharvas always visit this auspicious river. 
2::50::13::Since this river flows through heavens for the gods, it is wellknown as 'Devapadmini' where celestial lotuses grow. The river embraces hundreds of hills serving as sporting places and pleasuregardens for gods.
2::50::14::The sound of dashing waters of the Ganga is like her laughter and the foam like her sparkling smile. Here she flows straight like the braid of a maiden and there in whirlpools. 
2::50::15::Here the Ganga runs deep but quiet, there she looks perturbed due to fastflowing waters, here she flows with a deep groan and there with a dreadful roar. 
2::50::16::Here hosts of celestials take their ablutions and there she shines with lilies of pure blue. Here her banks are curved and there her bed is dotted with patches of white sand. 
2::50::17::The river reverberates with the cries of swans, cranes and chakravakas (ruddy goose). It rings intermittently with the chirpings of birds charged with endless pasison. 
2::50::18::Here on her banks stand trees adorned as though with garlands, and there in her waters abound fullblown lilies and a forest of lotuses.
2::50::19::Here she is decked with hosts of waterlilies and halfblown flowers while elsewhere she looks intoxicated with the pollen fallen from various flowers.
2::50::20::The river, cleansed of heaps of impurities, appears like a transparent gem. The interiors of forests on her banks always resounds with the trumpeting of mighty, intoxicated, wild elephants guarding the quarters, fit to be the vehicles of gods.
2::50::21::Just like a lady, Ganga is decorated with the best of ornaments her banks are filled with fruits, flowers, tender leaves or shoots and (flowering) shrubs. It is inhabited by birds and brahmins and infested with sisumaras (small whales), crocodiles and serpents. 
2::50::22::Mightyarmed Rama reached Srngaberapura on the bank of this consort of the ocean, this Ganga loud with the cries of kraunchas and herons. This sinless, divine Ganga, destroyer of sins who flows from the feet of lord Visnu and by the effulgence (penance) of Sagara's son (Bhagiratha) emerged from the matted locks of lord Siva. 
2::50::23:: Beholding river Ganga full of waves and whirlpools, the great chariotwarrior (Rama) said to Sumantra: We shall spend the night here.
2::50::24::O charioteer there is a very large ingudi (almond) tree not far from the river, luxuriant with flowers and budding leaves. We shall stay there tonight.
2::50::25::We shall watch Ganga, the best among rivers, whose holy waters are respected by gods, demons, gandharvas, beasts, serpents, men and birds alike.
2::50::26::Lakshmana and Sumantra agreed with Rama, saying 'Be it so' and turned the horses towards that ingudi tree.
2::50::27::Rama, delight of the Ikshvakus, along with his consort and Lakshmana reached that beautiful tree and alighted from the chariot.
2::50::28:: Sumantra also got off the chariot, unyoked the horses and with folded palms stood near Rama who had already reached the foot of the tree. 
2::50::29:: There lived the mighty king Guha who was born in the race of nishadas (hunters) and became famous as their lord. He was a friend to Rama who was like his own self. 
2::50::30::Having come to know that Rama, the best among men, had arrived in his region Guha accompanied by senior ministers and people of his clan came to greet him.
2::50::31::When Rama and Lakshmana saw from a distance that Guha, king of the nishadas, was approaching them, they went forward to receive him.
2::50::32::Overwhelmed with grief (to see Rama in bark), Guha embraced Rama and said This is just like Ayodhya to you. What can I do for you? O mightyarmed Rama, who can have the good fortune of receiving  such a beloved guest like you?
2::50::33::Thereafter he quickly brought rice and various kinds of tasty food and drink as welcome offerings and said to him:
2::50::34:: O mightyarmed prince, welcome to you This entire land belongs to you. You are our master and we, your servants. Rule this kingdom happily.
2::50::35::All kinds of food to be taken by biting, chewing, drinking and licking are here for you. There is an excellent bed ready. There are also enough fodder for the horses. 
2::50::36::Hearing (the words of) Guha, Rama replied By coming on foot to meet us and by displaying your friendliness, you have amply honoured us and pleased us. 
2::50::37:: Rama embracing him tightly with his strong arms said, O Guha it is fortunate that I am able to see you and your relations in good health. Hope, all is well with your friends, kingdom and (collection of) revenue.
2::50::38::I must give you back whatever you have offered me so affectionately. I am not in a position to accept anything.
2::50::39::You must know me as an ascetic devoted to righeousness,and as a wanderer in the forest wearing garments made of bark, kusa grass and antelope skin, subsisting on fruits and roots.
2::50::40::What I now need is fodder for the horses. Nothing more. If you can do this much, I'll deem it a great honour. 
2::50::41::If these horses which are the favourites of my father, king Dasaratha are wellfed, I shall consider myself honoured. 
2::50::42::Guha ordered the men standing there Give these horses liquids like water and forage.
2::50::43::Rama wearing the upper garment then offered oblations to Sandhya and partook of only water as refreshment, brought by Lakshmana.
2::50::44:: Lakshmana washed the feet of Rama who along with his consort lay upon the ground, and returned to take rest under the tree. 
2::50::45::Guha, bow in hand, conversing with Sumantra and Soumitri (Son of Sumitra, Lakshmana) then kept vigil over Rama by remaining awake (all night).
2::50::46::As the wise, illustrious, magnanimous son of Dasaratha (Rama) who was used to pleasures and not discomfort lay on the ground, the long night slipped away. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftieth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
