2::44::1::While Kausalya, the best of women was thus lamenting, virtuous Sumitra spoke to her these righteous words:
2::44::2::My venerable lady, your son Rama is the greatest among men and is endowed with every virtue. Why do you lament in this way? Why do you weep bitterly? 
2::44::3::In order to vindicate the words of his great and truthful father, O noble lady,your mighty son has renounced the kingdom and has gone (to the forest). He has stuck to the path so scrupulously followed by the wise, the everlasting results of which can be fully realised in the world to come. Such a peerless son is never to be grieved over.  
2::44::4::Blameless Lakshmana, compassionate to all beings, has acted most nobly in this matter for the benefit of his great soul. 
2::44::5:: The daughter of Videha (Sita) who was used to comforts has knowingly followed your virtuous son into the hardships of forest life.
2::44::6:: Your allcompetent son who considers righteousness and truth as wealth, is waving  the flag of fame in this world. What is that which your son did not gain ?
2::44::7::Knowing Rama's sterling purity and greatness the Sun evidently dare not scorch his body with its rays. 
2::44::8:: A pleasant yet moderately hot and cold breeze blowing through the woodlands will serve Rama at all seasons.
2::44::9:: While that sinless Rama sleeps at night, the Moon will comfort him by touching him with cool beams like a father embracing his son.
2::44::10::To the mighty, heroic Rama, that best of men, Brahmalike Viswamitra has bequeathed many divine weapons, seeing him slay Timidhwaja's son (Subahu), lord of demons, in the battle. He will stay fearless in the forest, relying on the strength of his own arms as though he were living in the palace. 
2::44::11:: When enemies who are targets of his arrows are destoyed, how can this earth, not stay under the command of Rama?
2::44::12::On return from his sojourn in the forest, Rama, endowed with splendour, valour and a strength that brings wellbeing will quickly regain his kingdom. 
2::44::13::O Devi Rama is the Sun (light) of the Sun, fire (splendour) of the fire, master (command) of masters, prosperity of the prosperous, the fame of the famous, forbearance of the forbearing, god of the gods and supreme among all beings. Whether he dwells in the forest or in the city, he has no demerit whatsoever. 
2::44::14::Rama, the best among men, will soon be coronated with these three namely the earth, the goddess of fortune and Sita. 
2::44::15::When the people of Ayodhya saw the godlike Rama departing, clad in robes of kusha and bark, they were moved to tears of grief. What is impossible for him who is unconquerable and whom Sita, like the goddess of fortune, follows. 
2::44::16::What is impossible for Rama ahead of whom moves Lakshmana, the best of archers, weilding swords, arrows and other weapons? 
2::44::17::I tell you the truth, Kausalya, that you will see Rama's return when the period of exile is complete. Hence give up your sorrow and delusion. 
2::44::18::O irreproachable and auspicious one you will see your son, like the rising Moon, touching your feet with his head. 
2::44::19::Soon you will see him enthrouned shining in full glory on his return from exile while tears of joy will flow from your eyes. 
2::44::20::Desist from grief or tear for Rama, O Devi nothing inauspicious will happen to him you will soon see your son along with Sita and Lakshmana. 
2::44::21::O sinless lady, O queen when you are overcome by fear, how can you console others? 
2::44::22::O Kausalya,  with a son like Rama, you should not grieve. There is none in this world superior to Rama who stands steady in the path of virtue.
2::44::23::Like a flake of cloud in monsoon, you are going to shed tears of joy soon seeing your son along with his friends bowing to you in reverence. 
2::44::24:: Your son, bestower of boons, will soon return to Ayodhya and press your feet with his soft, tender hands.
2::44::25::While paying obeisance to you, you will drench your brave son, surrounded by friends, with tears of joy like a mass of clouds drenching the mountain.
2::44::26:: Irreproachable and skilful in the use of words, queen Sumitra of cheerful disposition fell silent after thus consoling Rama's mother in various ways. 
2::44::27::On hearing the words of Lakshmana's mother the grief in the heart of the queen (Kausalya), mother of Rama, instantly disappeared like the autumnal cloud that holds but little rain. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुश्चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyfourth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
