2::2::1::तत: thereafter, वसुधाधिप: lord of the earth (king Dasaratha), सर्वाम् entire, परिषदम् assembly, आमन्त्र्य having invited, हितम् aimed at their welfare, उर्द्धर्षणम् thrilling, प्रथितम् pleasing, वच: words, एवं in this manner, उवाच spoke.
2::2::2::नृपति: lord of men, राजा king (Dasaratha), दुन्दुभिस्वनकल्पेन resonant as the sound of a kettledrum, गम्भीरेण with a deep (voice), अनुनादिना echoing, महता great, स्वरेण with voice, जीमूत: इव like the cloud, नादयन् thundering, राजलक्षणयुक्तेन having traits of royalty, कान्तेन with an attractive voice, अनुपमेन च and with an incomparable, रसयुक्तेन delightful, स्वरेण with voice, नृपान् addressing kings, उवाच said.
2::2::3::मे my, उत्तमम् greatest, राज्यम् kingdom, मम my, पूर्वकै: by the predecessors, राजेन्द्रै: by great kings, सुतवत् like children, यथा like, परिपालितम् were ruled, एतत् all this, भवताम् to you, विदितम् is wellknown.
2::2::4::स: such, अहम् I, इक्ष्वाकुभि: belonging to the Ikshvaku race, सर्वै: by all, नरेन्द्रै: by kings, परिपालितम् ruled, सुखार्हम् worthy of happiness, अखिलम् entire, जगत् world, श्रेयसा with welfare, योक्तुकाम: अस्मि desire to  accomplish.
2::2::5::पूर्वै: by my predecessors, आचरितम् trodden, पन्थानम् path,  अनुगच्छता while following, नित्यम् always, अनिद्रेण vigilant, मयापि by me also, प्रजा: people, यथाशक्ति to the best of my  ability, अभिरक्षिता: were protected.
2::2::6::कृत्स्नस्य of the entire, लोकस्य world's, हितम् welfare, चरता observing, मया by me, इदम् this, शरीरम् body, पाण्डुरस्य white, आतपत्रस्य royal parasol's, छायायाम् under the shadow, जरितम् attained old age.
2::2::7::बहूनि several, वर्षसहस्राणि thousands of years, आयूंषि lifespan, प्राप्य having reached,    जीवत: while living, जीर्णस्य of the decayed, अस्य शरीरस्य for this body, विश्रान्तिम् rest, अभिरोचये I desired.
2::2::8::राजप्रभावजुष्टां with royal qualities (might, courage etc.,), अजितेन्द्रियै: by those who have not controlled their senses, दुर्वहाम् difficult to sustain, गुर्वीम् heavy, लोकस्य world's, धर्मधुरम् burden of duty, वहन् carrying, परिश्रान्त: अस्मि I have become weary.
2::2::9::स: अहम् such as I am, सन्निकृष्टान् assembled, इमान् these, द्विजर्षभान् the best among (learned) brahmins, सर्वान् all, अनुमान्य after convincing them, पुत्रम् my son, प्रजाहिते for the welfare of the people, कृत्वा having consecrated, विश्रमम् rest, इच्छामि am desiring.
2::2::10::वीर्ये in prowess, पुरन्दरसम: equal to Indra, परपुरञ्जय: conqueror of enemy cities, मम my , ज्येष्ठ: आत्मज: eldest son, राम: Rama, सर्वै: by all, गुणै: virtues, माम् me, अनुजात: हि inherited indeed.
2::2::11::पुष्येण by the Pushya star, युक्तम् in conjunction, चन्द्रमिव resembling moon, धर्मभृताम् among upholders of righteousness, वरम् best, पुरुषपुङ्गवम् foremost among men, तम् him (Rama), प्रीत: pleased, यौवराज्ये as heirapparent, नियोक्ताऽस्मि propose to install.
2::2::12::नाथेन as lord, येन by whom, त्रैलोक्यमपि even the three worlds, नाथवत्तरम् स्यात् will have  better protector, स: he, लक्ष्मीवान् a man possessing signs of greatness, लक्ष्मणाग्रज: elder  brother of Lakshmana, अनुरूप: befitting, नाथ: वै is the lord.
2::2::13::तस्मिन् when such, सुते son (Rama), इमाम् this, महीम् earth, निवेश्य entrusting, अनेन श्रेयसा  to ensure the welfare of the world, एवम् thus, सद्य: without any delay, संयोज्य having united, गतक्लेश: relieved of my anxieties, भविष्यामि shall become. 
2::2::14::मया by me, सुमन्त्रितम् well thoughtover, इदम् this word, साधु proper, मे my, अनुरूपार्थं यदि if  worthy of me, भवन्त: you, मे to me, अनुमन्यन्ताम् your consent shall be given, अहम् I, कथं वा how else, करवाणि I shall do?
2::2::15::एषा this, मम my, प्रीति: यद्यपि even though I like, अन्यत् any alternative, हितम् means of welfare, विचिन्त्यताम् let it be thought over, मध्यस्थचिन्ता opinion of those without partiality, अन्या alternative, विमर्दाभ्यधिकोदया deliberations may bring good.
2::2::16::इति thus, ब्रुवन्तम् speaking, नृपम् king Dasaratha, नृपा: kings, मुदिता: delighted, वृष्टिमन्तम् raining, महामेघम् thick cloud, नर्दन्त: making sounds, बर्हिण: इव like peacocks, प्रत्यनन्दन् acclaimed.
2::2::17::तत्र there, स्निग्ध: affectionate, अनुनादी echoing, हर्षसमीरित: filled with pleasure, जनौघोद्घुष्टसन्नाद: sounds of rapturous cries of multitude of people, विमानम् that palace, कम्पयन्निव seemed as if shaking, संजज्ञे emanated.
2::2::18::ब्राह्मणा: brahmins, पौरजानपदै: सह along with the inhabitants of towns and villages, जनमुख्या: च prominent men also, धर्मार्थविदुष: conversant with dharma (righteousness) and artha (state craft), तस्य his (Dasaratha's), भावम् views, सर्वश: entirely, आज्ञाय having known, समेत्य having joined together, मन्त्रयित्वा having deliberated, मनसा with mind, ज्ञात्वा having ascertained, समतागतबुद्धय: unanimous in their thinking, वृद्धम् addressing the aged man (Dasaratha), ऊचु: spoke.
2::2::19::पार्थिव O mighty king त्वम् you, अनेकवर्षसाहस्र: many thousands of years old, वृद्ध: असि have become old, स: such as you are, रामम् Rama, पार्थिवम् as ruler of the earth, युवराजानम् as prince regent, अभिषिञ्चिस्व coronate him.
2::2::20::महाबाहुम् mightyarmed, रघुवीरम् hero among the Raghus, महाबलम् mighty, रामम् Rama, छत्रावृताननम् his countenance shadowed by the royal parasol, महता great, गजेन on an elephant, यान्तम् riding, इच्छाम: हि are desiring.
2::2::21::इति in this way, तद्वचनम् those words, श्रुत्वा having heard, राजा the king, तेषाम् their, मन: प्रियम् pleasing to their mind, अजानन्निव as if he did not know earlier, जिज्ञासु: with a wish to ascertain, इदम् these, वचनम् words, अब्रवीत् spoke.
2::2::22::राजान: O kings, मे my, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वैव soon after listening, यत् since, राघवम् son of the Raghus (Rama), पतिम् as king, इच्छथ wish, मे to me, अयम् this,  संशय: doubt, तत् इदम् this, तत्त्वत: truly, ब्रूत you may tell.
2::2::23::मयि by me, धर्मेण righteously, पृथिवीम् this earth, अनुशासति while governing, भवन्त: you, मम my, आत्मजम् son, युवराजम् as princeregent, द्रष्टुम् to see, कथं नु why indeed, इच्छन्ति wish
2::2::24::पौरजानपदै: सह along with inhabitants of towns and villages, ते those (kings), महात्मानम् that magnanimous, तम् addressing him, ऊचु: said, नृप O king, ते your, पुत्रस्य son's, बहव: many, कल्याणा: auspicious, गुणा: सन्ति are virtues indeed.
2::2::25::देव O king, गुणवत: of the man endowed with virtues, देवकल्पस्य resembling devatas, धीमत: sagcious Rama's, प्रियान् dear, आनन्दनान् causing delight, कृत्स्नान् all, तान् गुणान् his virtues, अद्य now, वक्ष्याम: we shall speak, शृणु listen.
2::2::26::विशांपते O lord of the people (Dasaratha), राम: Rama, दिव्यै: by the divine, गुणै: by virtues, शक्रसम: equal to Indra, सत्यपराक्रम: one with proven valour, सर्वेऽभ्योपि among all also, इक्ष्वाकुभ्य: among the descendents of Iksvaku, अतिरिक्त: distinguished.
2::2::27::लोके in this world, राम: Rama, सत्पुरुष: a venerable man, सत्यधर्मपरायण: devoted to truth and righteousness, रामात् from Rama, धर्म: च अपि righteousness also, श्रिया सह along with prosperity, साक्षात् directly, विनिर्वृत्त: flows.
2::2::28::प्रजासुखत्त्वे in causing happiness to the people, चन्द्रस्य of the Moon, क्षमागुणै: in the virtue of forbearance, वसुधाया: of the earth, बुद्ध्या by wisdom, बृहस्पते: of Brihaspati, वीर्ये in prowess, शचीपते: of  Indra, साक्षात् directly, तुल्य: equal.
2::2::29::धर्मज्ञ: knower of righteousness, सत्यसन्ध: true to his vows, शीलवान् one with good character, अनसूयक: free from envy, क्षान्त: one with forbearance, सान्त्वयिता one who consoles others, श्लक्ष्ण: gentle, कृतज्ञ: grateful, विजितेन्द्रिय: one who has conquered  the senses.
2::2::30::राघव: son of the Raghus (Rama), मृदु: च softspoken, स्थिरचित्त: च steadfast, सदा always, भव्य: serene, अनसूयक: free from envy, भूतानाम् for living beings, प्रियवादी pleasing  सत्यवादी च one who always speaks the truth, बहुश्रुतानाम् of those learned in a number of  shastras, वृद्धानाम् of elderly persons, ब्राह्मणानाम् of brahmins, उपासिता serves, तेन with these, अस्य his, अतुला incomparable, कीर्ति: glory, यश: fame, तेजश्च splendour, इह in this world, वर्धते growing.
2::2::31::देवासुरमनुष्याणाम् among devatas, asuras and men, सर्वास्त्रेषु in wielding all kinds of weapons, विशारद: expert, सम्यक् properly, विद्याव्रतस्नात: completed the vow of acquiring various branches of learning, यथावत् duly, साङ्गवेदवित् has learnt the Vedas and their supplementary sciences.
2::2::32::भरताग्रज: the elder brother of Bharata (Rama), गान्धर्वे in music, भुवि on this earth, श्रेष्ठ:  बभूव became greatest, कल्याणाभिजन: having a noble descent, साधु: a pious man, अदीनात्मा with his mind free from meanness, महामति: possessing great intellect.
2::2::33::धर्मार्थनैपुणै: distinguished in the twin aspects of dharma and artha श्रेष्ठै: by the best, द्विजै: by brahmins, अभिविनीत: wellinstructed in all the matters, ग्रामार्थे for the sake of a village, नगरस्य वा or a town, यदा when, सङ्ग्रामम् the battle, व्रजति proceeds, सौमित्रिसहित: along with Lakshmana, गत्वा having gone, अविजित्य without conquering, न निवर्तते does not return.
2::2::34::सङ्ग्रामात् from the battlefield, कुञ्जरेण mounting on elephant, रथेन वा or on a chariot, पुन: आगम्य having returned, पौरान् citizens, स्वजनवत् like his own kith and kin, पिता father, औरसान् पुत्रानिव like sons of his own blood, पुत्रेषु with respect to their children, अग्निषु sacred fires, दारेषु wives, प्रेष्यशिष्यगणेषु च multitudes of their servants and disciples, निखिलेन in detail, आनुपूर्व्याच्च by following the proper order (protocol), नित्यम् always, कुशलम् welfare, परिपृच्छति enquires.
2::2::35::व: your, शिष्या: disciples, कर्मसु in their tasks, दंशिता: perform, शुश्रूषन्ते are serving, इति like this, पुरुषव्याघ्र: a tiger among men, राम: Rama, सदा always, न: us, अभिभाषते enquires.
2::2::36::मनुष्याणाम् of people, व्यसनेषु in misfortunes, भृशम् profoundly, दु:खित: भवति is grieved, सर्वेषु among all, उत्सवेषु on festive occasions, पितेव like father, परितुष्यति rejoices.
2::2::37::सत्यवादी one who speaks the truth, महेष्वास: one who is a great archer, वृद्धसेवी one who serves the aged, जितेद्रिय: one who has conquered his senses,  स्मितपूर्वाभिभाषी च   speaks with a smiling face, सर्वात्मना wholeheartedly, धर्मं श्रित: takes refuge in dharma.
2::2::38::सम्यक् rightly, श्रेयसां योक्ता does good, विगृह्य creating dissention, कथारुचि: न not interested in conversation, उत्तरोत्तरयुक्तौ in debates, वाचस्पतिर्यथा like Brihastpati, वक्ता orator.
2::2::39::लोकाभिराम: one who is the delight of the worlds, अयम् he, राम: Rama, सुभ्रू: having charming eyebrows, आयतताम्राक्ष: having large coppercoloured eyes, शौर्यवीर्यपराक्रमै:   with heroism, bravery and valour, साक्षात् manifesting, स्वयम् personally, विष्णु: इव like Visnu.
2::2::40::प्रजापालनतत्वज्ञ: proficient in the ways and means of ruling the people, रागोपहतेन्द्रिय: senses not overpowered by passion,  न not, एक: alone, त्रैलोक्यमपि three worlds, भोक्तुम् to enjoy, शक्त: capable, इमाम् this, महीम् earth, किन्नु why to say?
2::2::41::अस्य his, कोप: anger, प्रसादश्च favour also, कदाचन ever, निरर्थ(क): in vain, नास्ति is not, नियमात् in accordance with justice, वध्यान् those who deserve to be killed, हन्ति एव is punishable, अवध्ये those who should not be killed, न कुप्यति does not get angry.
2::2::42::असौ he (this Rama), यत्र wherever, तुष्यति is pleased, तम् him, प्रहृष्ट: pleased, अर्थै: with wealth, युनक्ति bestows, शान्तै: with tranquil, सर्वप्रजाकान्तै: charming to all men, नृणाम् for men, प्रीतिसञ्जननै: causing delight to the good, गुणै: with virtues, राम: Rama, अंशुभि: with rays, दीप्त: shining, सूर्य: इव like Sun, विरुरुचे shines.
2::2::43::मेदिनी the earth, एवं गुणसम्पन्नम्  richly endowed with such virtues, सत्यपराक्रमम् with proven  prowess, लोकपालोपमम् comparable to Indra and other regents of the world, (तं)रामम् Rama, नाथम् as lord, अकामयत desired.
2::2::44::राघव O son of the Raghus (Dasaratha), तव your, दिष्ट्या fortunately असौ this Rama, श्रेयसि for your welfare , ते to  you, वत्स: as son , जात: was born,मारीच: son of Maricha ,काश्यप:इव like Kasyapa ,दिष्ट्या  fortunately, पुत्रगुणै: by the  virtues  a son should possess, युक्त: is endowed with.
2::2::45::सगन्धर्वोरगेषु along with gandharvas, uragas, देवासुरमनुष्येषु among devas, asuras and men, विदितात्मन: wellknown, रामस्य Rama's, बलम् strength, आरोग्यम् health, आयुश्च long life, राष्ट्रे in the country, तथा also, पुरवरे in the foremost of towns,  सर्व: जन: all men, आभ्यन्तर: च in the neighbourhood, बाह्यश्च or distant, पौरजानपद: जन: inhabitants of towns and villages, आशंसते are wishing for.
2::2::46::वृद्धा: the aged, तरुण्यश्च young, स्त्रिय: women, सायम् at dusk, प्रात: at dawn, समाहिता: with steadfast minds, यशस्विन: illustrious, रामस्य of Rama, अर्थे on account of, सर्वान् all, देवान् the gods, नमस्यन्ति are invoking.
2::2::47::देव O king, त्वत्प्रसादात् by your grace, तेषाम् their, आयाचितम् prayer, समृद्ध्यताम् be fulfilled, राजोत्तम great among kings, इन्दीवरश्यामम् complexion like blue lotus, सर्वशत्रुनिबर्हणम् destroyer of foes, तव your, आत्मजम् son, रामम् Rama, यैवराज्यम् as prince regent, पश्याम: shall see.
2::2::48::वरद O bestower of boons, देवदेवोपमम् equal to god of the gods, सर्वस्य for the entire, लोकस्य for the world, हिते in the welfare, निविष्टम् intent upon, उदारजुष्टम् one who welcomes nobility, तम् that, ते आत्मजम् your son, त्वम् you, न: for our, हिताय welfare, क्षिप्रम् without delay, मुदा cheerfully, अभिषेक्तुम् to enthrone as heirapparent, अर्हसि behoves you.
