2::49::1:: Recollecting his father's command, Rama, the foremost among men, covered a long distance during the remaining part of the night.
2::49::2::While Rama was thus travelling, the auspicious night ended. With the sandhya (morning twilight), worship over, he reached the frontiers of the country. 
2::49::3::Watching the villages furrowed at the outskirts, forests in blossom, hearing the gossips of the people living in the midst of villages, Rama felt he was moving very slowly whereas he had actually covered a long distance with those excellent (swift) horses. 
2::49::4::(The villagers were speaking among themselves) Fie on the king who is overtaken by passion Alas, the heartless, sinful Kaikeyi, indulging in evil has banished into the forest this prince who is righteous and sagacious, compassionate and selfrestrained. How could this cruel Kaikeyi, by breaking all limits of decorum resort to such atrocious action?
2::49::5::How will Sita, highly fortunate daughter of Janaka and used to comforts endure these sufferings? 
2::49::6::Alas, the loveless king Dasaratha now intends to abandon his own sinless son Rama who is dear to the subjects.
2::49::7::Such were the words of people living in villages and hamlets that Rama the valiant lord of Kosala happened to hear as he was crossing the boundaries of Kosala.
2::49::8::He then crossed the river Vedasruti flowing with sacred waters and went in the southern direction where sage Agastya resided.
2::49::9:: Travelling for a long time along the river Gomati full of cool waters on whose marshy bank cows grazed, Rama crossed it at the point where it flows into the sea.
2::49::10::Gomati gone, Rama with the swiftmoving horses crossed the river Syandika echoing with the cries of peacocks and swans. 
2::49::11::Rama showed Sita vast tracts of land encircled by kingdoms which were formerly bestowed upon Ikshvaku by emperor Manu.
2::49::12::Graceful Rama, best among men with a voice resembling that of an intoxicated swan, called the charioteer again and again and said: 
2::49::13::When shall I return and reunite with my father and mother and go hunting in the blooming forest on the bank of the river Sarayu?
2::49::14::In this world, hunting is a unique pleasure. It is regarded as a delightful sport for royal sages. But I do not have a great longing for hunting in the forest on the bank of river Sarayu. 
2::49::15::In this world, hunting in the woods is a pleasure for royal sages and is greatly sought after by bowmen. This was later resorted to by others.
2::49::16::The descendant of Ikshvaku related to the charioteer in a sweet voice the thoughts that came to him and went on the way (continued his journey). इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyninth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
