2::77::1::ततः then, दशाहे the tenth day, अतिगते  having passed, कृतशौचः purified himself, नृपात्मजः king's son, Bharata, द्वादशे on the twelfth, अहनि day, सम्प्राप्ते had arrived, श्राद्धकर्माणि  shraddha rites, अकारयत् got them performed.
2::77::2::ब्राह्मणेभ्यः to brahmins, रत्नम् precious stones, धनम् wealth, पुष्कलम् in abundance, अन्नम् rice, महार्हाणि highly valuable, वासांसि garments, विविधानि of various kinds, रत्नानि gems, ददौ gave.
2::77::3::पुत्रः son of Dasaratha, तस्य that, राज्ञः king's, और्ध्वदैहिकम् rites pertaining to the other world, ब्राह्मणेभ्यः to brahmins, बहु many, शुक्लम् white in colour, बास्तिकम् of goats, तथा also, शतशः in hundreds, गाश्चापि even cows, दासी दासं च male and female servants, यानं च carriages, सुमहान्ति spacious, वेश्मानि च houses, ददौ gave. 
2::77::4::ततः then, त्रयोदशे on the thiteenth, दिवसे day, प्रभातसमये at dawn, अथ thereafter, शोधनार्थम् for purification, उपागतः having arrived (at the cemetery), महाबाहुः mightyarmed, भरतः Bharata, शोकमूर्छितः rendered unconscious by grief, शब्दापिहितकण्ठः loudly, विललाप lamented, पितुः father's, चितामूले at the foot of the pyre, सुदुःखितः intensely grieved, इदं वाक्यम् these words, आह spoke.
2::77::5::तात O father, यस्मिन् भ्रातरि to that brother, राघवे in Rama, अहम् I, त्वया by you,निसृष्टः  entrusted, तस्मिन् that Rama, वनम् to forest, प्रव्रजिते has been sent, अहम् I, त्वया by you, शून्ये in a vacuum, त्यक्तः अस्मि I have been left.
2::77::6::नृप king, तात father, आनाथायाः of the orphaned lady, यस्याः गतिः whose support, पुत्रः son (Rama), वनम् to forest, प्रव्राजितः has been sent, ताम् that, अम्बम् mother, कौशल्याम् Kausalya, त्यक्त्वा forsaking, क्व where, (त्वं) गतः have you gone? 
2::77::7::सः he, भस्मारुणम् reddish brown with ashes, दग्धास्थि with burnt bones, पितुः father's, शरीरनिर्वाणम् where the body was made extinct, तत् that, स्थानमण्डलम् circular place, दृष्ट्वा having seen, निष्टनन् crying aloud, विषसाद indulged in sorrow. 
2::77::8::सः तु as regards Bharata, दृष्ट्वा having seen, दीनः desolate, रुदन् sobbing, उत्थाप्यमानः as it was being raised, च्युतः fallen down, शक्रस्य Indra's, यन्त्रध्वजः इव like fastened flag staff, धरणीतलौ on the ground, पपात fell.
2::77::9::ततः thereafter, सर्वे all, तस्य अमात्याः his counsellors, शुचिव्रतम् a man of pious vows, अन्तकाले at the final hour, निपतितम् fallen down, ययातिम् Yayati, ऋषयो यथा like the ascetics, अभिपेतुः ran towards him.
2::77::10::शत्रुघ्नश्चापि Satrughna too, भरतम् Bharata, दृष्ट्वा beholding, शोकपरिप्लुतः plunged in grief, भूमिपालम् the king, अनुस्मरन् remembering, विसंज्ञः unconscious, भूमौ on the ground, न्यपतत् fell down.
2::77::11::पितुः father's, तानि तानि those respective ones, गुणाङ्गानि virtues resulting one from the other, तथा तथा again and again, स्मृत्वा recollecting, उन्मत्तः इव like a mad person, निश्चेताः becoming mentally unsteady, सुदुःखितः in profound sorrow, विललाप lamented. 
2::77::12::मन्थराप्रभवः with Manthara as the source, कैकेयी ग्राहसङ्कुलः Kaikeyi as a crocodile, अक्षोभ्यः  undisturbed, तीव्रः terrible, वरदानमयः in the form of irrevocable boons, शोकसागरः sea of sorrow, अमञ्जयत् drowned.
2::77::13::तात father, सुकुमारम् tender, बालं च young, त्वया by you, सततम् always, लालितम् fondled, विलपन्तम् lamenting, भरतम् Bharata, हित्वा leaving, भवान् you, क्व where, गतः have you gone? 
2::77::14::भोज्येषु in delicious food, पानेषु in drinks, वस्त्रेषु in garments, आभरणेषु च in ornaments, सः सर्वान् all of us, प्रवारयसि ननु used to make us choose, तत् that, नः for us, अन्यः some other, कः who, करिष्यति will do? 
2::77::15::धर्मज्ञेन aware of righteous ways, महात्मना mighty, राज्ञा by the king, त्वया by you, या the earth, विहीना devoid of, पृथिवी that earth, अवदारणकाले at the time of breaking into pieces, नावदीर्यते does not break.
2::77::16::पितरि when father, स्वर्गम् heaven, आपन्ने had ascended, रामे च when Rama, अरण्यम् the forest, आश्रिते had taken refuge, मे to me, जीवितसामर्थ्यम् strength to live, किम् what is there, हुताशनम् blazing fire, प्रवेक्ष्यामि I will enter. 
2::77::17::भ्रात्रा with brother, पित्रा च with father, हीनः devoid of, शून्याम् empty, इक्ष्वाकुपालिताम् ruled by Ikshvakus, अयोध्याम् Ayodhya, न प्रवेक्ष्यामि I will not enter, तपोवनम् penance grove, प्रवेक्ष्यामि I shall enter.
2::77::18::तयोः of both of them, विलपितम् lamentations, श्रुत्वा having heard, तत् that, व्यसनम् of calamity, अन्ववेक्ष्य reflecting, सर्वे all, अनुगामिनः attendants, भूयः again, भृशम् extremely, आर्ततराः become more afflicted. 
2::77::19::ततः thereafter, विषण्णौ dejected, श्रान्तौ च exhausted, उभौ both, शत्रुघ्नभरतौ Satrughna and Bharata, भग्नशृङ्गौ with the horns broken, ऋषभौ इव like bulls, धरण्याम् on the floor, संव्यवेष्टेताम् lay writhing. 
2::77::20::ततः then, प्रकृतिमान् of composed character, वैद्यः learned, एषाम् their, पितुः father's, पुरोहितः priest, वसिष्ठः Vasistha, तम् भरतम् that Bharata, उत्थाप्य having raised, वाक्यम् these words, उवाच said.
2::77::21::विभो O lord, अयम् it is, वृत्तस्य of the dead, ते पितुः your father's, त्रयोदशः the thirteenth, दिवसः day, सावशेषास्थिनिचये when the heap of bones and ashes still remain, त्वम् you, इह  here, किम् why, विलम्बसे are you delaying? 
2::77::22::त्रीणि three, द्वन्द्वानि dualities, भूतेषु in living beings, अविशेषतः without exception, प्रवृत्तानि  are applicable, तेषु they, अपरिहार्येषु cannot be eschewed, एवम् भवितुम् to become sorrowful, नार्हसि it does not behove you.
2::77::23::तत्त्वज्ञः knower of truth (nature of the Brahman), सुमन्त्रश्चापि Sumantra also, शत्रुघ्नम् Satrughna, उत्थाप्य have raised, अभिप्रसाद्य च having consoled him, सर्वभूतभवाभवम् about birth and death, श्रावयामास made him to listen.
2::77::24::उत्थितौ the two risen, यशस्विनौ illustrious, नरव्याघ्रौ tigers among men, पृथक् separately, वर्षातपपरिक्लिनौ faded due to the heat of Sun and rain, इन्द्रध्वजाविव like the banners of Indra, प्रकाशेते shone.
2::77::25::अश्रूणि tears, परिमृद्नन्तौ wiping  away, रक्ताक्षौ with blodshot eyes, दीनभाषिणौ speaking in desolation, तनयौ both sons, अमात्याः counsellors, अपराः the remaining क्रियाः funeral rites, त्वरयन्ति स्म hastened up. 
