2::40::1:: Thereafter, Sita, Rama and Lakshmana with folded palms in a forlom state touched (the feet of) the king and circumambulated him. 
2::40::2::Taking leave of Dasaratha, the righteous descendant of the Raghus (Rama) along with Sita paid obeisance to his mother Kausalya who was afflicted with deep grief.
2::40::3::Immediately following Rama, his brother, Lakshmana also paid obeisance to Kausalya and, thereafter, held the feet of his own mother Sumitra. 
2::40::4::While the mightyarmed Lakshmana paid her homage, Sumitra wailed, kissed him on his forehead, wished him well and said: 
2::40::5:: Although deeply attached to your beloved ones, O Son, you are born to dwell in the forest. Never be inattentive towards your brother Rama who is on his way (to the forest).
2::40::6:: Rama is your refuge in times of adversity or prosperity, O sinless one To be obedient to the eldest (brother) is the duty of virtuous men in this world.
2::40::7::Charity, initiation at sacrifices and yielding life in battles are the befitting ancient traditions prevailing in your race.
2::40::8::Having said this to Lakshmana Sumitra again and again said to her beloved Rama, who was fully prepared, 'Go, go'.
2::40::9::(To Lakshmana she said) Regard Rama as Dasaratha, Sita as me and the forest as Ayodhya. My child, go in peace.
2::40::10:: Then Sumantra who knows the ways of politeness and humility spoke to Rama, with folded hands as Matali did to Indra. 
2::40::11::O Illustrious prince, wish you well Mount the chariot. I shall convey you speedily whereever you want.
2::40::12::You have been directed by Kaikeyi to live in the forest for fourteen years. Accordingly you must now commence counting those years as directed.
2::40::13::Sita of lovely limbs decorated herself and with a cheerful mind boarded the chariot which was shining like the Sun.
2::40::14:: Thereafter, Rama and Lakshmana also boarded that chariot decorated with gold and  shining like blazing fire. 
2::40::15:: Fatherinlaw (Dasaratha) gave clothes and ornaments on the assessment of the number of years Sita was going to spend in the forest with her husband. 
2::40::16::So also Dasaratha secured a multitude of weapons, shields and protective leathercoverings for hands and placed them at the centre of the chariot, for use by the brothers. When Sumantra ensured that Sita, Rama and Lakshmana boarded the chariot,  he briskly hastened the horses which were as speedy as the wind. 
2::40::17:: Having seen Rama set out  for the great forest for a long period, the city was stilled and men were enervated. 
2::40::18::The city was distressed and flurried by the intoxicated elephants, provoked by the mighty sound of the tinkling of bells and the neighing of the horses. 
2::40::19::Thereafter the extremely afflicted people of the city, including young and old alike, ran towards Rama like men oppressed with heat running for water. 
2::40::20::All the people hanging from the chariot from behind and by the sides, heaving deeply, their faces covered with tears, thus addressed to Sumantra: 
2::40::21::O charioteer, control the reins of the horses and go slow so that we may look at the face of Rama, for soon we will not be able to see him. 
2::40::22:: Alas, the heart of Kausalya whose son, Rama, resembles the offspring of the gods, does not break even though he is going to the forest Undoubtedly it must be made of iron. 
2::40::23::Sita, deeply attached to her duty, and with her desire fulfilled is following her husband like a shadow just as the sunlight which never leaves mount Meru.
2::40::24:: With your desires fulfilled, O Lakshmana, you will attend to your godlike brother who always speaks pleasant words. 
2::40::25:: The very fact that you are  following Rama is a great achievement and a great fortune for you. This, in fact, is the way to heaven.
2::40::26:: Speaking thus, the people following their beloved Rama, the delight of the Ikshvaku dynasty, were not able to bear (restrain) the tears flowing from their eyes.
2::40::27::I wish to see my beloved son said the king with a sense of desolation and emerged, surrounded by forlorn women, from the palace. 
2::40::28:: He heard the women crying loudly in front like wailings of cowelephants when their bull elephant is captured. 
2::40::29:: The king born in the race of Kakutstha, though bright, looked dull then like the full Moon eclipsed (by Rahu).
2::40::30::The son of Dasaratha, glorious Rama of inconceivable courage, exhorted the charioteer to drive the chariot fast.
2::40::31:: Urged by Rama to drive fast on the one hand and by the citizens to stay, on the other, the charioteer could do neither on the way.
2::40::32::As the mightyarmed Rama was going away, the dust raised from the earth subsided with the tears falling from the citizens' (eyes).
2::40::33::At the time of Rama's departure, the insensate city was drenched with tears of the deeply afflicted people crying, 'Alas, Alas'. 
2::40::34::Tears born of anguish fell from the eyes of women just as waterdrops fall from lotuses shaken by the movements of fishes.
2::40::35:: Having seen the city (people) absorbed in one single thought, the prosperous king, griefstricken, fell down on the ground like a tree severed at its root.
2::40::36::When the people saw the king enfeebled by deep grief, they raised an uproar behind Rama's (chariot). 
2::40::37::Some among them wailed 'Oh Rama', while some others cried 'Oh mother of Rama' By crying loudly, they made the women in the inner apartment cry too.
2::40::38:: When Rama glanced back, he saw his mother and father trailing behind him on the highway, with an agitated and dejected mind. 
2::40::39::Like a fastened foal cannot see its mother, Rama restrained by bonds of duty could not see his parents clearly. 
2::40::40::Seeing his parents, who were worthy of riding a chariot now going on foot, who were accustomed to comforts and did not deserve any suffering, Rama urged his charioteer to drive fast.
2::40::41:: Rama the best among men, could not, like an elephant tormented by the goad, endure that pitiful sight of his father and mother.
2::40::42:: Rama's mother ran after the chariot, like an affectionate cow running towards the shed to join its fastened calf. 
2::40::43::While Kausalya was weeping and running after the chariot, crying O 'Rama, O Sita, O Lakshmana, shedding tears for them, Rama repeatedly glanced at her who was twisting and bending as if in a dancing pose.
2::40::44:: The king cried, 'Stay, Stay', while Rama said 'Go on, Go on'. Sumantra's mind was caught as if in between two wheels. 
2::40::45:: When the king reproaches you for not stopping the chariot, you can say 'I could not hear'.Prolonging agony is sinful, said Rama to Sumantra. 
2::40::46:: Obeying the command of Rama and after taking leave of the people, Sumantra hastened the horses although they were galloping.
2::40::47:: The king's men returned, with Rama circumambulated (on the plane of their minds). But from their minds they could not hold back their tears (grief).
2::40::48:: We should not follow over a long distance those we wish to return, said the ministers to king Dasaratha. 
2::40::49::Dasaratha and his wives, overcome with grief, heard their words steeped in virtue (wisdom). The king stood there with his perspiring body and melancholic appearance, fixing his gaze on his son.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortieth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic  composed by sage Valmiki.
