2::65::1::Then on the following day (unaware of Dasaratha's death) panegyrists uttering benedictions, highly accomplished bards and genealogists proficient in reciting auspicious words, singers versed in musical science reached the palace one after another eulogising the king's glory.
2::65::2::Then on the following day (unaware of Dasaratha's death) panegyrists uttering benedictions, highly accomplished bards and genealogists proficient in reciting auspicious words, singers versed in musical science reached the palace one after another eulogising the king's glory.
2::65::3::The songs of those who were eulogising the king and uttering benedictions at high pitch pervaded the entire palace.
2::65::4::While the bards sang the praise of the king, those who praise clapping their palms  clapped, citing the wonderful deeds of Dasaratha.
2::65::5:: The birds perched on the branches and some in cages awoke and began to twitter all over the palace.
2::65::6::The sacred songs of bards and panegyrists, notes of veena, chantings of metrical hymns and benedictory verses filled the palace.
2::65::7::Thereafter, as usual, men observing purificatory practices and skilled in royal service  assembled along with women and eunuchs.
2::65::8:: The bathattendants brought water mixed with yellow sandal paste in golden vessels at appropriate times in accordance with tradition.
2::65::9:: Also, a group of women mostly young maidens brought auspicious unguents, articles gratifying the senses and those necessary accessories for completion of bathing process.
2::65::10::All the articles brought for the king (for his bath) were presentable and as per tradition. In quality they were excellent and auspicious. 
2::65::11:: All the highly enthusiastic attendants waited for the king till sunrise. Unable to see the king  they doubted about what had happened 
2::65::12::The women who usually attend to the bed (maids who do the bed in the morning) of Dasaratha (king of Kosala) without any restrictions, approached the king and began waking him up.
2::65::13:: Conducting themselves agreeably with restraint and obedience,  the women touched the bed of Dasaratha but did not perceive any sign of life.
2::65::14::Those women knowledgeable in ascertaining the nature of sleep based on the actions, movements, etc. were apprehensive whether the king was  alive or not. Trembling severely  they seemed like the tips of reeds that  stand against the current.
2::65::15:: Having seen the king more closely, those women who were apprehensive till then, became certain of the inevitable.  
2::65::16::Overpowered by grief on account of separation from their sons, Sumitra and Kausalya were fast asleep and did not wake up as if they were possessed by death.
2::65::17::Kausalya, with her face dull and pallid, sank down, her limbs contracted. She looked lustreless like stars enveloped in darkness.
2::65::18::There lay Sumitra next to Kausalya by the side of the king. Queen Kausalya's face was dull, drooping  down on account of shedding tears of sorrow. 
2::65::19::Having seen the two auspicious queens asleep, the women in the inner apartment thought the king died in his sleep.
2::65::20:: Then those women bewailed bitterly and loudly in distress like female elephants in the forest when their leader has fallen out of the herd.  
2::65::21::Hearing the lamentations of the women suddenly Kausalya and Sumitra woke up from sleep, their senses recovered.
2::65::22:: Kausalya and Sumitra looked at the king, touched his body, cried aloud, 'Ah, lord' and collapsed on the floor.
2::65::23::Kausalya, daughter of the lord of Kosala, lay on the ground writhing in pain, coated  with dust, and devoid of brightness like a star without radiance fallen from the sky.  
2::65::24:: Dasaratha with his body lying still, all the women looked at Kausalya fallen down on the floor like a slain female elephant.
2::65::25:: Then all the wives of the king led by Kaikeyi,  burning with grief and weeping, lost their senses and fell down.
2::65::26:: The wailings of the women grew louder and louder until the whole palace reverberated with their lamentations. 
2::65::27:: On the demise of Dasaratha, joy instantly vanished. The palace was thronged with anxious people who were exceedingly bewildered and frightened. The royal family was anguished with distress. The palace was filled all over with the tumult of cries of agony. And it looked miserable with grief. 
2::65::28:: Realising that the great and illustrious king, Dasaratha, had passed away, his wives gathered around him, weeping piteously and bitterly and holding one another's hands  bewailed like orphans.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyfifth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
