2::95::1::Then Rama, the lord of Kosala, descended from the mountain and showed Sita the charming river Mandakini of sacred waters.
2::95::2::Lotuseyed Rama said to the heavyhipped daughter of the king of Videha, whose face resembled the beauitiful Moon.
2::95::3::Look at this enchanting river Mandakini with its variegated sandbanks frequented by geese and swans and adorned with lotuses.
2::95::4::See this river sparkling with trees of every kind laden with fruits and flowers growing on its banks. Everywhere it resembles the lake Nalini of Kubera.
2::95::5::The herds of deer have just drunk water by descending down the landing places and the waters are still turbid. This sight produces great pleasure in me.
2::95::6::O my beloved rishis with matted locks and wearing deer skins and bark of trees as upper cloth bathe in the river Mandakini for performing morning ablutions in time.
2::95::7::O largeeyed Sita, some other ascetics of rigid austerities worship the sungod according to tradition, lifting up their arms and invoking the Sun.
2::95::8::With the trees whose tops are swayed by the wind, the mountain was as if dancing, shedding leaves and flowers all around the river. 
2::95::9::Behold this river Mandakini whose waters here are transparent like crystals, there sparkling with sand dunes and elsewhere crowded with siddhas.
2::95::10::Look at the scattered heaps of flowers shaken off by the wind and large quantities of flowers floating on the waters.
2::95::11::O my auspicious Sita, sweetvoiced Chakravaka birds singing in most pleasant tones are alighting on those heaps of flowers.
2::95::12::My lovely Sita, I consider watching this mount Chitrakuta and river Mandakini in your presence more delightful than living in Ayodhya.
2::95::13::The waters of river Mandakini is perpetually agitated by siddhas who are endowed with asceticism, selfrestraint and tranquillity and who are cleansed of sins by taking bath in the river. Plunge with me into this river.
2::95::14::O lovely Sita, like a companion plunge into this river Mandakini, submerging the red and white lotuses, and enjoy sporting.
2::95::15::O my lovely lady Always think this river Mandakini as Sarayu and this mount Chitrakuta as Ayodhya and these wild animals as its inhabitants.
2::95::16::With righteous Lakshmana obedient and you, O Sita, agreeable to me, you both bring me great pleasure. 
2::95::17::Bathing thrice in your company at the time of prayers and partaking honey, roots and fruits, I do not yearn either for Ayodhya or for the kingdom.
2::95::18::With this enchanting Mandakini teeming with herds of deer, whose waters are drunk by elephants, lions and monkeys, decorated with heaps of flowers fallen from the trees in full bloom, who will not feel happy and free from fatigue.
2::95::19::Rama, the perpetuator of the Raghu dynasty, describing the river Mandakini at length appropriately in this manner, wandered in the company of his beloved consort on mount Chitrakuta looking black like collyrium.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चनवतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the ninetyfifth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
