2::2::1:: Thereafter, the lord of the earth (king Dasaratha) addressed the entire assembly of  invitees. He spoke these pleasing words aimed at their welfare which thrilled and delighted the hearts (of the assembled kings): 
2::2::2::Lord of men (king Dasaratha) addressed the feudatory kings with words deep, resonant, loud like the kettledrum or the rumbling cloud, in a delightful, incomparable and attractive voice that carried all the dignity of royalty:
2::2::3::It is wellknown to all of you that people of this greatest kingdom were ruled by my predecessors who were great kings, who looked after the subjects as though they were their own children. 
2::2::4:: I desire to  accomplish the welfare of this entire world which deserves the happiness brought about by the rule of all the Ikshvaku kings.
2::2::5::Following the path of my forefathers I protected the people to the best of my ability by being ever vigilant.
2::2::6::My body has attained old age after ruling the entire world ensuring the welfare of the people under the shade of royal white parasol.
2::2::7::Having lived for thousands of years this body is now worn out  due to old age and therefore I want rest.
2::2::8::I am weary of carrying on the heavy burden of duty and find it difficult to sustain the rule of dharma. It can be shouldered by those who have royal qualities (of might, courage etc) and not by those who have not controlled their senses.
2::2::9::Therefore, after convincing all of you, the best of (learned) brahmins present here, I intend to take rest by installing my son to look after the welfare of the people. 
2::2::10:: My eldest son Rama, inheriting every virtue of mine, is a conqueror of enemy cities  and is equal to Indra in prowess.
2::2::11::I propose to install him (Rama), foremost among upholders of righteousness and the best of men who resembles the Moon in brightness when in conjunction with Pushya star, as heirapparent to the throne.
2::2::12::With him (Rama) as ruler, all the three worlds will also have a better protector.That elder brother of Lakshmana with signs of greatness is certainly the most befitting to rule this kingdom. 
2::2::13::I shall be relieved of my anxiety  by entrusting the land (ruled by me) to my son (Rama) without any more delay and thus ensure the continued welfare of this world. 
2::2::14:: Although it (this decision) is personally favourable to me and I have decided after seeking good counsel, you should also give me your consent and tell me what I should do.
2::2::15::Although this is what I would like to do, please suggest alternative ways of achieving the welfare (of this kingdom). Deliberations by the unbiased (on this issue) may bring good.
2::2::16::Having thus heard king Dasaratha speak, the kings acclaimed him with delight, like peacocks crying (in joy) to see thick clouds.
2::2::17::There emanated cries of love and joy from the multitude of people (conveying their approval) whose reverberation seemed to shake the palace.
2::2::18:: Brahmins, kings and other prominent men, inhabitants of towns and villages  having  fully known the views of Dasaratha who was conversant with artha and dharma  joined together and deliberated. They thought out well and having arrived at unanimity in their thinking thus addressed the aged king Dasaratha.
2::2::19::O mighty king, you have grown many thousands of years old. Therefore, you should coronate Rama as prince regent of this kingdom.
2::2::20::We cherish to see the mightyarmed hero among the Raghus, Rama, riding on a majestic elephant, his countenance shadowed by the royal parasol.
2::2::21::Having heard them king Dasaratha, pretending as though he was not aware of their heart's desire but was now wishing to ascertain it, spoke these words:
2::2::22::O kings, soon after listening to my words, all of you wish Rama to be king. (But) I doubt (in my mind) whether you have said it from your heart৷৷
2::2::23::When the earth is being ruled righteously by me why indeed you intend to see my son as prince regent?
2::2::24::Those kings along with the inhabitants of towns and villages answered the  magnanimous king: O king your son, indeed has many auspicious and admirable  virtues.
2::2::25:: O king, we shall now speak about those great virtues of the sagacious (Rama). Comparable to those of the gods, they are dear and a source of delight for every one. Please listen.
2::2::26::Lord of the people Rama with his divine virtues is equal to Indra. He with his  proven valour is exceptional among all the descendents of the Iksvakus.
2::2::27::Devoted to truth and righteousness Rama is the most venerable among men in this world. Even righteousness along with prosperity flows directly from Rama.
2::2::28::He is equal to the Moon in causing happiness to the people, to the earth in forbearance, to Brihaspati in wisdom and to Indra in prowess.
2::2::29::Rama knows the ways of righteousness. He is true to his word and free from envy. He possesses a sound character with forbearance, gentleness and a sense of gratitude. With his senses under control, he is a source of consolation (in stressful times).
2::2::30::This son of the Raghus (Rama) is softspoken, steadfast, always serene, truthful and  free from envy. He is pleasing to all beings. He serves those elderly brahmins versed in many lores. With these virtues his incomparable glory, fame and splendour have steadily grown.
2::2::31::He is an expert in wielding all kinds of weapons available to devas, asuras and  men. He has achieved mastery over all sciences and has appropriately acquired knowledge of the Vedas and its ancillary sciences.
2::2::32::This elder brother of Bharata is the greatest exponent in music on earth. Pious, sagacious, free from meanness, he is of noble descent.
2::2::33::Whenever he, wellinstructed in all matters by the best of brahmins wellversed in dharma and artha proceeds along with Lakshmana to wage a war for the sake of a village or a town, he never returns without conquering the enemy.
2::2::34::While returning from the battlefield, either on a chariot or an elephant Rama stops and  enquires in detail and in order, the welfare of the citizens as he would do for his kith and kin. He enquires about the welfare of their children, sacred  rituals, wives, their servants and disciples as a father would enquire of his sons.
2::2::35::Rama, a tiger among men, always enquires whether our disciples discharge their duties.
2::2::36::He grieves profoundly whenever people are afflicted by misfortunes (and) rejoices like a father on festive occasions.  
2::2::37::.He is one who speaks the truth. He is a great archer, one who has conquered his senses and serves the aged. He speaks with a  smile and protects dharma with all his heart. 
2::2::38::He helps those who take refuge in him. He is not  interested in conversation leading to  dissentions. But during debates he is eloquent like Brihaspati (establing the truth on the basis of reasoning).
2::2::39::Rama, who is the source of delight to the world, has charming eyebrows and large coppercoloured eyes. He is endowed with heroism, bravery and valour like Visnu manifested.
2::2::40::He is proficient in the ways and means of ruling the people. His senses are not overpowered by passion. He alone is capable of ruling the three worlds, what to speak the earth
2::2::41::His anger or favour never goes in vain. He kills those who rightly deserve to be killed  and flares not at those whose life is to be spared.
2::2::42::When pleased, Rama bestows wealth. Like the Sun shining with his rays, He shines  with his qualities of tranquil, charming and loving nature.
2::2::43::The earth desired to have Rama, richly endowed with such virtues, possessing proven  prowess, comparable to Indra and other regents of the world, as her lord.
2::2::44::O son of the Raghus (Dasaratha), because of  your good  fortune that Rama, endowed with the qualities of an ideal son like Kasyapa to Maricha was born to you for the welfare of this world.
2::2::45::Gandharvas, uragas, devas, asuras, the inhabitants of towns and villages, all men living  in neighbouring or distant regions are wish the illustrious Rama strength, health and long life.
2::2::46::Women, young and old alike devoutly invoke at dusk and at dawn all the gods for the sake of the celebrated Rama.
2::2::47::O Lord let the peoples' prayer be fulfilled by your blessings. We would like to see your son Rama of the complexion of a bluelotus and destroyer of enemies as prince regent.
2::2::48::O bestower of boons it behoves you to install with delight and without delay your son (Rama) endowed with all virtues equal to god of the gods and committed to our wellbeing and to the welfare of this world, as your heirapparent. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्वितीयस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the second sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
