2::24::1::तम् him, पितुः father's, निर्देशपालने in carrying out the command, अवहितम्  determined, समीक्ष्य having perceived, कौशल्या Kausalya, बाष्पसंरुध्दा with choked tears, धर्मिष्ठम् pious, वचः words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::24::2::अदृष्टदुःखः one who had never experienced sorrow, धर्मात्मा righteous, सर्वभूतप्रियंवदः one who speaks pleasantly to all, दशरथात् of Dasaratha, मयि to me, जातः born, उञ्छेन by collecting the grains fallen on the ground, कथम् how, वर्तयेत् will maintain.
2::24::3::यस्य whose, भृत्याश्च servants,दासाश्च attendants, मृष्टानि delicious, अन्नानि cooked rice, भुञ्जते enjoy, अथः hereafter, सः अयम् such Rama, वने in the forest, मूलफलानि roots and fruits, कथम् how, भोक्ष्यते will eat?
2::24::4::गुणवान् virtuous, दयितः affectionate, राघवः Rama, राज्ञा by the king, विवास्यते इति यत् will be exiled in this way, एतत् all this, श्रुत्वा having heard,  कः who, श्रद्धधेत् will believe,  कस्य वा to whom, भयम् fear, न भवेत् will not cause.
2::24::5::राम O Rama, लोके अभिरामः delight of this world, त्वम् you, वनम् to the forest, यत्र गमिष्यसि  if ordered to go, लोके in the world, सर्वम् everything,  आदिशन् while ordering, कृतान्तः destiny, नूनम् certainly, बलवान् allpowerful.
2::24::6::पुत्र O son, आत्मभवः born from the body, तव अदर्शन मारुतः (my) sighs that will suggest your absence, विलापदुःखसमिधः with fuels of lamentation and affliction, रुदिताश्रुहुताहुतिः invoking with the offering of oblations of (my) wailing tears, चिन्ताबाष्पमहाधूमः with great  smoke of vapour arising from anxious thoughts, तव your, आगमन चित्तजः born from the thought of your return, निश्वासायाससम्भवः produced from sighs of exhaustion, अतुलः incomparable, महान् great, अयं शोकाग्नि: this fire of grief,  इह now, त्वया by you, विहीनाम्  deprived, माम् me, भृशम् very much, कर्शयित्वा having emaciated, हिमात्यये in summer, चित्रभानुः fire, कक्षं यथा like or a bunch of dry grass, प्रधक्ष्यति will burn.
2::24::7::धेनुः cow, गच्छन्तम् wandering, स्वं वत्सम् its calf, कथं हि how, नानुगच्छति will not follow, पुत्र son, यत्र whereever, गमिष्यसि you will go, अहम् I, त्वा you, अनुगमिष्यामि will follow.
2::24::8::पुरुषर्षभः best among men, रामः Rama, मात्रा by mother, तथा that way, निगदितम् spoken, तद्वाक्यम् those words, श्रुत्वा on hearing, भृशदुःखिताम् deeply afflicted, मातरम् addressing his mother, वाक्यम् words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::24::9::कैकेय्या by Kaikeyi, वञ्चितः was deceived, राजा king, मयि when I, अरण्यम् forest, आश्रिते will be resorting to, भवत्या च by you also, परित्यक्तः deserted, न वर्तयिष्यति he will not live, नूनम् this is certain.
2::24::10::स्त्रियाः for a woman, भर्तुः husband's, परित्यागः desertion, केवलम् only, नृशंसः किल is a cruel  act indeed, विगर्हितः is abominable, सः that, भवत्या by you, मनसापि even in mind, न कर्तव्यः  must not be done.
2::24::11::मे पिता my father, जगतीपतिः lord of the earth, काकुत्स्थः  the descendant of Kakutstha, यावत् as long as, जीवति lives, तावत् till then, शुश्रूषा service, क्रियताम् be done, सः that one, धर्मः हि सनातनः it is eternal virtue.
2::24::12::रामेण by Rama, एवम् thus, उक्ता having been said, शुभदर्शना auspiciouslooking lady, कौशल्या Kausalya, सुप्रीता exceedingly pleased, अक्लिष्टकारिणम् unshakable in actions, रामम् to Rama, तथेति 'Be it so', उवाच said.
2::24::13::धर्मभृतां among upholders of rightcouness, वरः foremost, रामः Rama, एवम् in this way, वचनम् words, उक्तः having been spoken to, भृश दुःखिताम् in deep grief, ताम् her, मातरम् to mother, भूय: again, वाक्यम् words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::24::14::मया चैव by me as well, भवत्या च by you also, पितुः father's, वचनम् words, कर्तव्यम् fit to be carried out, राजा king, भर्ता supporter husband, गुरुः guru, श्रेष्ठः best, सर्वेषाम् for all, ईश्वरः is the lord, प्रभुः master.
2::24::15::इमानि these, नव पञ्च च nine plus five (fourteen), वर्षाणि years, महारण्ये in the wild forest, विहृत्य having roamed, परमप्रीतः with supreme pleasure, तव your, वचने words (obeying your word), स्थास्यामि shall abide by.
2::24::16::तदा then, एवम् thus, उक्ता addressed, पुत्रवत्सला affectionate towards (her) son, कौशल्या Kausalya, परमार्ता a greatly distressed, बाष्पपूर्णानना with her face (eyes) filled with tears, प्रियम् beloved, पुत्रम् son, उवाच said. 
2::24::17::राम O Rama, मे for me, आसाम् of these, सपत्नीनाम् of cowives, मध्ये in the midst of, वस्तुम्  to live, न क्षमम् not able, काकुत्स्थ scion of the Kakutstha race (Rama), पितुः with regard to your father, अपेक्षया with wish, गमने in going away, ते to you, बुद्धि: decision, कृता यदि if it is made, मामपि also me, वन्याम् relating to the forest (wild), मृगीं यथा like a female deer, वनम् to the forest, नय take me.
2::24::18::रामः Rama, तथा that way, रुदतीम् wailing, ताम् to her, रुदन् while (himself) sobbing, वचनम् words, अब्रवीत् said, जीवन्त्या for a living lady, स्त्रियाः for a woman, भर्ता husband alone, दैवतम् is god, प्रभुरेव च is also lord (master).
2::24::19::प्रभुः powerful one, राजा king, अद्य now, भवत्याः for you, मम च for me also, प्रभवति has the authority to command, लोकनाथेन by lord of the entire world, धीमता by sagacious one, राज्ञा by king, वयम् we, अनाथाः without master, न हि are not.
2::24::20::धर्मात्मा virtuous, सर्वभूतप्रियंवदः who speaks pleasantly to all beings, भरतश्चापि Bharata also, भवतीम् you, अनुवर्तेत will follow, सः he, सदा always, धर्मरतः हि is attached to righteousness.
2::24::21::मयि me, निष्क्रान्ते having departed to the forest, पार्थिवः king, पुत्रशोकेन with grief for his son, यथा how, किञ्चित् even a little, श्रमम् effort, न अवाप्नुयात् will not obtain, तथा in that way, अप्रमत्ता with attention, कुरु do.
2::24::22::दारुणः terrible, अयं शोकः this  grief, एनम् him, यथा in a manner, न विनाशयेत् will not ruin (his health), समाहिता with composed mind, वृद्धस्य of the old, राज्ञः of the king, सततम् always, हितम् good, चर act.
2::24::23::या नारी whichever woman, व्रतोपवासनिरता engaged in vows and fastings, परमोत्तमा highly pious, भर्तारम् husband, नानुवर्तेत does not follow, सा she, पापगतिः hell a, भवेत् will get.
2::24::24::या who, निर्नमस्कारा pays no respect, देवपूजनात् from worshipping gods, निवृत्ता has abstained, नारी अपि woman also, भर्तुः husband's, शुश्रूषया with service, उत्तमम् highest, स्वर्गम् heaven, लभते will attain.
2::24::25::भर्तुः husband's, प्रियहिते wellbeing, रता engaged, शुश्रूषामेव service alone, कुर्वीत shall do, एषः this, पुरा in ancient times, लोके in this world, दृष्टः is seen, वेदे in the Vedas, श्रुतः is heard, स्मृतः declared in Smritis, धर्मः is truth.
2::24::26::देवि O devi, मत्कृते for my sake, सदा always, देवताः the gods, अग्निकार्येषु in offering oblations to the firegod, सुमनोभिश्च with flowers, ते to you, पूज्याः worthy of worship, सुव्रताः true to their religious vows, ब्राह्मणाश्चैव brahmins also.
2::24::27::एवम् in this maner, मम my, आगमनकाङ्क्षिणी looking forward to my return, नियता selfpossessed lady, नियताहारा observing discipine in food, भर्तृ शुश्रूषणे in the service of your husband, रता devoted, कालम् time, प्रतीक्षस्व wait for.
2::24::28::मयि when I, प्रत्यागते सति having returned, धर्मभृताम् of protcetor of dharma, श्रेष्ठः best, जीवितम् life, धारयिष्यति यदि if  he contains, परमम् highest, कामम् desire, प्राप्स्यसे will obtain.
2::24::29::रामेण by Rama, एवम् in this manner, उक्ता having been said, कौशल्या Kausalya, पुत्रशोकार्ता distressed with grief for her son, बाष्पपर्याकुलेक्षणा with her eyes filled with tears, रामम् to Rama, वचनम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::24::30::वीर O valiant one, पुत्रक my child, गमने to go to the forest, सुकृताम् firmly resolved, ते बुध्दिम् your mind, विनिवर्तयितुम् to revert, न शक्नोमि I am not able, नूनम् certainly, कालः time, दुरत्ययः difficult to overcome (pass).
2::24::31::पुत्र O Son त्वम् you, एकाग्रः with resolute mind, गच्छ go, विभुः god, ते to you, सदा always, भद्रम् safety, अस्तु be it, त्वयि when you, पुनः again, निवृत्ते तु on your coming back,  गतव्यथा relieved of suffering, भविष्यामि I shall become.
2::24::32::महाभागे when the reverend one, त्वयि you, कृतार्थे with your purpose accomplished, चरितव्रते when your vow is fulfilled, पितुः father's, आनृण्यताम् acquittal of debt, प्राप्ते obtained, प्रत्यागते on coming back, परम् supreme, सुखम् happiness, लप्स्ये I will attain. 
2::24::33::पुत्र O son, राघव O Rama, यः whichever (destiny), मे my, वचः words, आच्छिद्य  cutting asunder (disregarding), त्वा you, सञ्चोदयति is prompting, कृतान्तस्य destiny's, गतिः course, सदा always, भुवि in this world, दुर्विभाव्या is inconceivable.
2::24::34::महाबाहो O mighty armed one, इदानीम् now, गच्छ go, पुत्र O son, क्षेमेण safely, पुनः आगतः again on your return, साम्ना in a gentle voice, चारुणा by sweet, वाक्येन  utterances, माम् me, नन्दयिष्यसि please.
2::24::35::पुत्रक O my dear child, वनात् from the forest, पुनः again, प्रत्यागतम् have returned, जटावल्कल  धारिणम् wearing matted hair and bark, त्वाम् you, यत् since, पश्येयम् will see, सः कालः that time, इदानीम् now itself, अपि स्यात् can it be now itself?
2::24::36::देवी Devi (Kausalya), रामम् Rama, तथा like that, वनवासनिश्चितम् determined to go to the forest, समीक्ष्य (ददर्श) seeing, परमेण चेतसा with supreme consciousness, शुभलक्षणम् with auspicious qualities (virtues), रामम् to Rama, वचः words, उवाच said, स्वस्त्ययनाभिकाङ्क्षिणी wishing to perform ceremonies for (his) wellbeing, बभूव became.
