2::1::1:: Bharata set out for his maternal uncle's house. He took with him the sinless Satrughna who is always successful in destroying foes and on whom he had bestowed his love and affection.
2::1::2::Treated with warm hospitality and fatherly affection by his maternal uncle Aswapati, Bharata stayed on there along with his brother. 
2::1::3::Though both the heroic brothers stayed there satisfied on their own they constantly remembered their aged father.
2::1::4::The glorious king Dasaratha also remembered his sons, Bharata and Satrughna, who  were like the great Indra and Varuna, (now) away from home. 
2::1::5::Dasaratha, a bull among men, loved all his four sons equally just as the  arms of his own body. 
2::1::6::Even among them the brilliant Rama was a source of delight to his father like the Selfborn (Brahma) to all living beings. 
2::1::7:: Entreated by the devatas desirous of slaying arrogant Ravana, the eternal Visnu was indeed born in the mortal world as Rama.
2::1::8::Kausalya looked splendid with her son, Rama of boundless energy, as did Aditi with the chief of the gods Indra, wielder of thunder.
2::1::9::Endowed with beauty and strengh, free from envy, and in virtues equal to Dasaratha, Rama was verily an incomparable son on earth. 
2::1::10::With an unfailing serenity of mind, Rama never paid back harshness with harshness. 
2::1::11::Gifted with selfrestraint, Rama was pleased even with a single benefit done somehow to him, yet did not remember even a hundred offences  committed by others. 
2::1::12::Even during intervals of  his practice of weapons he never failed to interact with saintly persons and with people advanced in age, virtue and wisdom. 
2::1::13::Wise and softspoken, he was the first to speak to others words pleasing to hear. Though mighty, he was never proud of his overwhelming strength. 
2::1::14::Rama never told lies. He was a learned man. He honoured elders by going forward to them. He loved his subjects as much as his subjects loved him. 
2::1::15::He was kindhearted and compassionate to the distressed, coolheaded and righteous. A worshipper of brahmins he was always selfrestrained and pure in spirit.
2::1::16::He entertained thoughts befitting his (great) dynasty and honoured the code of conduct of a kshatriya. He believed one could attain heavenly abode through his great achievements.
2::1::17::A learned man, he evinced no interest in pursuits that did not contribute to one's welfare or had he any liking for speaking against others. But in debates his oratorical flourish was comparable to Brihaspati's. 
2::1::18::He was young, eloquent, healthy and free from disease. He was conscious of (right) time and place (for his pursuits). He was capable of ascertaining the potentiality of men. He was born a sage in this world. 
2::1::19::Bestowed with such excellent qualities, the prince (Rama) became a favourite of his subjects.  He was like their vital life outside their bodies.
2::1::20::With the appropriate sacred ablution marking the completion of the vow relating to the respective branches of learning in accordance with tradition, this elder brother of Bharata achieved proficiency in the Vedas and its auxiliary sciences. He surpassed his father in archery. 
2::1::21:: Born in a family of noble descent, he was saintly. A man without meanness.He was truthful and a man of rectitude. The training he received under aged brahmins conversant with dharma and artha made him welldisciplined.
2::1::22::He knew the true nature of dharma, artha and kama. With a sharp memory,  he was a genius. He was highly skilled in accomplishing tasks related to social practices and customs. 
2::1::23::He (Rama) was modest and did not reveal his inner feelings. He counselled in secrecy and had good friends. Never was his anger or pleasure in vain. He knew the occasion  when to sacrifce and when to exercise restraint. 
2::1::24::He was firm in his devotion and steady in intellect. He accepted nothing ignoble nor used bad words. He was not swayed by emotions or prone to idleness. He knew his faults as well as of others. 
2::1::25::He was versed in scriptures. He was grateful (to those who did him some good) and skilled in differentiating the comparative merits of men. Fair in his judgement he dispensed justice in accordance with law by reprimanding (the delinquent) and favouring (the honest).
2::1::26:: He was skilled in  receiving and encouraging the righteous and in punishing (the wicked). He knew  whom to punish. He knew the right means of raising revenue and also expending money in the prescribed manner.
2::1::27::He obtained proficiency in scriptures and interconnected (mutually contradictory) branches of learning. Only after having grasped the (philosophy of) artha (statecraft) and dharma (righteousness), he sought pleasure. He was never indolent.
2::1::28:: He had understanding of art and craft useful for entertainment. He knew proper  ways of dispensing wealth. He was experienced in riding elephants and horses and in humbling them.
2::1::29::He was the best among those skilled in archery in this world. He was reckoned as a great wielder of warchariots and one who strikes at the enemies by advancing towards them. He was an expert in commanding troops. (Atiratha is an excellent warrior who can manage his chariot, horses and the charioteer.) 
2::1::30::He was incapable of being repressed even by the enraged devatas or rakshasas in the battle. He was free from envy and had subdued his anger and pride. He was never malicious and he never slighted any living being nor did he bow to the pressure of time.
2::1::31::Thus endowed with such excellent qualities, the subjects in the three worlds held him in high esteem. In forbearance he was like the earth, in wisdom like Brihaspati and in prowess like the consort of Sachi (Indra).
2::1::32::Rama whose virtues were cherished by all his subjects was a source of delight to his father and he shone like the rays of the resplendent Sun.
2::1::33::The earth desired him as her lord, for he was bestowed with such avowed virtues and with indomitable prowess equal to all the guardians of the quarters.
2::1::34::Observing his son endowed with such innumerable and incomparable virtues, king Dasaratha, subduer of enemies started thinking.
2::1::35::Thereafter, flashed in the mind of that aged king who had (already) lived long this pleasant thought as to how Rama will become king while he was alive.
2::1::36::The thought of seeing his dear son coronated repeatedly surfaced his mind so great was his affection (for Rama).
2::1::37:: (He said to himself) 'his (Rama's) only desire is to promote the prosperity of this world. He is one who shows compassion to all beings and is like the raingod dearer than me to the people of the world'.
2::1::38::'In prowess he is equal to Yama and Indra,in wisdom to Brihaspati and in firmness to a mountain and in virtues greater than me'.
2::1::39::'Seeing my son ruling this entire dominion of the earth, I will experience the bliss of attaining heaven at this age.'
2::1::40::King Dasaratha in consultation with his ministers observed that Rama is endowed  with various virtues not found in other kings, immeasurable virtues which are praiseworthy, and exemplary. He is distinguished in this world as all qualities seem to have merged in him. The king then made up his mind to make him princeregent. 
2::1::41::The sagacious king, too perceived his body ageing and the portentous omens in the heaven, in the sky and on the earth causing dreadful concern.
2::1::42::The king realised afterwards that his grief would be dispelled if noble Rama whose countenance resembled the full moon and who was a favourite of the people is crowned.
2::1::43::Longing for it, the noble king realized that the time was ripe for the acceleration of the process of safeguarding his own and his subjects' welfare.
2::1::44::He summoned individually kings and all important citizens residing in various cities and villages of this earth.
2::1::45::The king did not invite both the kings of Kekaya and Janaka  in  haste with an  intention that they would hear the glad news at a later date.  
2::1::46::The king who received them in a befitting manner and provided them with residence and ornaments looked like lord Brahma adorned by the people.
2::1::47::After the king (Dasaratha) who was a tormenter of enemy forces was seated, the rest of the kings beloved of their subjects entered (the assembly hall).
2::1::48::Then  the kings (who entered the assembly) took the seats assigned to them facing the king (Dasaratha), following the royal tradition.
2::1::49::Surrounded by those feudatory kings endowed with modesty, and received with due honour and by the respectful residents of cities and villages, the king (Dasaratha), resembled lord Indra, the thousand eyed encircled by the gods.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे प्रथमस्सर्गः।Thus ends the first sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
