2::45::1::अनुरक्ताः devoted, मानवाः men, वनवासाय to dwell in the forest, प्रयान्तम् setting out, महात्मानम् great, सत्यपराक्रमम् to one whose truth is his power, तं रामम् that Rama, अनुजग्मुः followed him.
2::45::2::सुहृद्वर्गे when hosts of friends, राजनि च and when the king, बलात् forcibly, निवर्तितेऽपि च  though sent back, रामस्य Rama's, रथम् chariot, अनुगताः followers, ते those people, नैव     संन्यवर्तन्त did not return.
2::45::3::महायशाः illustrious, गुणसम्पन्नः endowed with virtue of every kind, अयोध्यानिलयानाम् dwelling in Ayodhya, पुरुषाणाम् for men, पूर्णचन्द्र इव like the full Moon, प्रियः बभूव हि became dear.
2::45::4::सः that, काकुत्स्थ: descendant of the Kakutsthas (Rama), तदा then, स्वाभिः his own, प्रकृतिभिः by the subjects, याच्यमानः although pleaded, पितरम् father's, सत्यम् as truthful, कुर्वाणः doing, वनमेव to the forest, अन्वपद्यत proceeded.
2::45::5::रामः Rama, चक्षुषा with eyes, प्रपिबन्निव as if drinking, ताः those, प्रजाः people, स्वाः his own, प्रजाः इव like children, सस्नेहम् (स्नेहेन) with affection, अवेक्षमाणः seeing, उवाच said.
2::45::6::अयोध्यानिवासिनाम् of residents of Ayodhya, मयि in me, या प्रीतिः which love, बहुमानश्च also respect, सा that one, विशेषेण specially, मत्प्रियार्थं for endearing me, भरते in Bharata, निवेश्यताम् be placed on Bharata.
2::45::7::कल्याणचारित्रः one having auspicious character, कैकेय्यानन्दवर्धनः enhancer of  Kaikeyi's delight, सः that Bharata, यथावत् appropriate, वः to you, प्रियाणि agreeable, हितानि च beneficial acts also, करिष्यति हि will do.
2::45::8::ज्ञानवृद्धः old in wisdom, वयोबालः young in age, मृदुः gentle, वीर्यगुणान्वितः endowed with valour and virtues, सः he, वः to you, अनुरूपः worthy one, भयापहः eliminating fears, भर्ता भविष्यति will be protector.
2::45::9::राजगुणैः royal qualities, युक्तः endowed with, सः that, युवराजः as heirapparent, समीक्षितः is recognised, अपि च also, मया by me, शिष्टैः by others, वः to  you, भर्तृशासनम् king's order, कार्यम् should be obeyed.
2::45::10::मयि when I, वनवासम् to the forest, गते had left, असौ महाराजः this king, यथा as, न च सन्तप्येत्  does not grieve, तथा in that way, मम to me, प्रिय चिकीर्षया with a desire to please, कार्यः fit to be done.
2::45::11::दाशरथिः Dasaratha's son, Rama, यथा यथा such as, धर्मे एव in righteousness only, आस्थितः अभवत् became committed, तथा तथा in the same way, प्रकृतयः subjects, रामम्  Rama, पतिम् as king, अकामयन् desired.
2::45::12::सौमित्रिणा सह accompanied by the son of Sumitra (Lakshmana), रामः Rama, बाष्पेण with tears, पिहितम् concealed, दीनम् piteous, पुरनिवासिनम् citydwellers, जनम् people, गुणैः with his virtues, बद्ध्वा इव as if bound by, चकर्ष attracted.
2::45::13::ज्ञानेन in wisdom, वयसा in age, ओजसा in spiritual energy, त्रिविधम् in all the three ways, वृद्धाः aged, ते द्विजाः those brahmins, वयः प्रकम्पशिरसः shaking due to old age, दूरात् from a distance, इदम् these, वचः words, ऊचुः spoke.
2::45::14::रामम् Rama, वहन्तः conveying, जवनाः swift, जात्याः of noble breed, भो भो तुरङ्गमाः O horses, निवर्तध्वम् turn back, न गन्तव्यम् do not proceed, भर्तरि in your master (Rama), हिताः  भवत be good.
2::45::15::भूतानि animals, कर्णवन्ति हि have keen sense of hearing, तुरङ्गमाः horses, विशेषेण especially, तस्मात् therefore, याचनाम् entreaty, प्रतिवेदिताः having known, यूयम् you, निवर्तध्वम् turn back.
2::45::16::धर्मतः righteous, विशुद्धात्मा a purified soul, वीरः brave, शुभदृढव्रतः auspicious and firm in resolve, सः वः भर्ता your master, उपवाह्यः should be carried back, पुरात् from the city, वनम् to the forest, न अपवाह्यः should not carry.
2::45::17::एवम् in this manner, आर्तप्रलापान् pitiful lamentations, प्रलपतः muttering, वृद्धान् aged, तान्द्विजान् those brahmins, अवेक्ष्य having seen, रामः Rama, सहसा immediately, रथात् from the chariot, अवततार ह alighted.
2::45::18::अथ then, स सीतः along with Sita, सहलक्ष्मणः and Lakshmana, रामः Rama, वनपरायणः (moving) towards the forest, सन्निकृष्टपदन्यासः with a slow pace, पद्भ्याम् एव on foot alone, जगाम went.
2::45::19::चारित्रवत्सलः fond of probity, घृणाचक्षुः compassionate eyes, सः रामः that Rama, पदातीन् those walking on foot, तान् द्विजातीन् those brahmins, रथेन with the chariot, परिमोक्तुम् to leave them, न शशाक was not possible.
2::45::20::द्विजाः brahmins, गच्छन्तमेव thus going, तं रामम् that Rama, दृष्ट्वा having seen, सम्भ्रान्तचेतसः with agitated mind, परमसन्तप्ताः deeply distressed, इदं वाक्यम् these words, ऊचुः said.
2::45::21::सर्वम् all, एतत् these, ब्राह्मण्यम् order of brahmins, ब्रह्मण्यम् seeking good of the brahmins, त्वाम् you, अनुगच्छति is following, अमी these, अग्नयः अपि sacred fires also, द्विजस्कन्धाधिरूढाः mounting on the shoulders of brahmins, त्वाम् you, अनुयान्ति following.
2::45::22::वाजपेयसमुत्थानि acquired while performing Vajapeya sacrifice, नः पृष्ठतः behind us, अनुप्रयातानि are coming, एतानि these, छत्राणि umbrellas, जलात्यये at the end of the rainy season, मेघानिव like clouds, पश्य please see.
2::45::23::अनवाप्तातपत्रस्य for one without an umbrella, रश्मिसन्तापितस्य of a man scorched with the rays of the Sun, ते to you, वाजपेयिकैः acquired during Vajapeya sacrifice, स्वैः by your own, छत्रैः with umbrellas, छायाम् shade, करिष्यामः will extend.
2::45::24::वत्स dear child, न: our, या बुद्धि: mind, सततं always, वेदमन्त्रानुसारिणी follows Vedic hymns that one, त्वत्कृते for your sake, वनवासानुसारिणी one seeking the forest life, कृता is made.
2::45::25::नः our, परं धनम् greatest wealth, ये those, वेदाः the Vedas, हृदयेष्वेव in our hearts, तिष्ठन्ति are remaining, दारा अपि our wives also, चारित्ररक्षिताः protected by fidelity, गृहेष्वेव at home, वत्स्यन्ति shall stay.
2::45::26::पुनः again (another), निश्चयः decision, न कार्यः should not be taken, त्वद्गतौ on your journey, मतिः mind, सुकृता is well set, त्वयि in you, धर्मव्यपेक्षे reluctant to follow 'dharma', धर्मपथे in the path of righteousness, किम् what?, स्थितं स्यात् is left now? 
2::45::27::निभृताचार ever firm in duty, महीपतनपांसुलैः soiled with the dust fallen on the ground, हंसशुक्लशिरोरुहैः having hairs white like the (plumes of a) swan, नः our, शिरोभिः with our  heads, याचितः beg of you, निवर्तस्व you may return.
2::45::28::ये who, इह here, आगताः have arrived, बहूनाम् many, द्विजानाम् brahmins, यज्ञाः sacrifices, वितताः commenced, वत्स O dear child, तेषाम् their, समाप्तिः consummation, तव your, निवर्तने returning, आयत्ता is dependent.
2::45::29::राम Rama, जङ्गमाजङ्गमानि movable and immovable, भूतानि living beings, भक्तिमन्ति हि are  devoted to you, त्वम् you, याचमानेषु supplicants, भक्तेषु in devotees, भक्तिम् devotion, दर्शय show.
2::45::30::मूलैः with their roots, उद्धतवेगिनः crushed with their speed, पादपाः trees, त्वाम् you, अनुगन्तुम्  to follow, अशक्ताः unable, वायुवेगेन with the speed of wind, उन्नताः uplifted, विक्रोशन्तीव weeping like.
2::45::31::पक्षिणोऽपि even the birds, निश्चेष्टाहारसञ्चाराः without foraging for food and wanderings,  वृक्षैकस्थानविष्ठिताः perched on the trees at one place, सर्वभूतानुकम्पिनम् one compassionate to all creatures, प्रयाचन्ते are imploring. 
2::45::32::एवम् in this way, निवर्तने seeking his return, तेषां द्विजातीनाम् those brahmins, विक्रोशताम्  crying, तत्र there, तमसा Tamasa river, राघवम् Rama, वारयन्तीव as if preventing, ददृशे appeared.
2::45::33::ततः then, सुमन्त्रोऽपि Sumantra also, श्रान्तान् fatigued, हयान् horses, रथात् from the chariot, विमुच्य having unyoked, शीघ्रम् quickly, सम्परिवर्त्य allowing them to roll and relax, पीतोदकान्  making them drink water, तोयपरिप्लुताङ्गान् bathing them in water, तमसाविदूरे not far from river Tamasa, अचारयत् made them graze.
