2::8::1::मन्थरा तु as for Manthara, एनाम् about her, अभ्यसूय having been disgusted, कोपदु:ख समन्विता filled with rage and sorrow, तत् that, आभरणम् ornament, उत्सृज्य having discarded, तत: after that, इदम् वाक्यं this word, उवाच said.
2::8::2::बालिशे O foolish one, अस्थाने misplaced, हर्षम् happiness, कृतवती असि you are displaying, इदम् this one, किम् why, शोकसागरमध्यस्थम् in the midst of the ocean of sorrow, आत्मानम् about yourself, नावबुध्यसे do not know.
2::8::3::देवि O queen, महत् great, इदम् this, व्यसनम् misfortune, प्राप्य having obtained, शोचितव्ये (at a time) one should feel sad, यत् since, हृष्टा असि you are rejoicing, दु:खार्दिता सती although afflicted with grief, त्वाम् about you, मनसा in my mind, प्रहसामि I am laughing.
2::8::4::ते you, दुर्मतित्वम् false notion, शोचामि I feel pity, प्राज्ञा any wise woman,  का who, अरे: enemy's, सपत्नी पुत्रस्य of cowife's son, वृद्धिम् prosperity, आगताम् having  arrived, मृत्योरिव like death, प्रहर्षयेत् would rejoice.
2::8::5::रामस्य for Rama, राज्यसाधारणात् having equal claim to rule the kingdom, भरतादेव from  Bharata only, भयम् fear, तत् that matter, विचिन्त्य having thought over, विषण्णा अस्मि I am dejected, भीतात् from the person who fears, भयम् fear, जायते हि will be born. 
2::8::6::महेष्वास: one holding a great bow, लक्ष्मण: Lakshmana, सर्वात्मना with all his heart, रामम् of  Rama, गत: has taken refuge, शत्रुघ्न: च अपि and Satrughna also, लक्ष्मण: Lakshmana, काकुत्स्थं यथा like (Rama) a descendant of Kakutstha dynasty, भरतम् (has reached) Bharata.
2::8::7::भामिनि O beautiful woman, प्रत्यासन्नक्रमेणापि in order of birth also, राज्यक्रम: succession to the kingdom, भरतस्यैव is for Bharata only, कनीयसो: younger ones, तयो: तावत् for both of them, विप्रकृष्ट: is remote.
2::8::8::विदुष: of the learned, क्षत्रचारित्रे in the duties of a kshatriya, प्राज्ञस्य of the competent, प्राप्तकारिण: one who does what is right at appropriate time, भयात् out of fear, तव आत्मजम् about your son, चिन्तयन्ती while reflecting, प्रवेपे I am trembling. 
2::8::9::यस्या: whose (Kausalya's), पुत्र: son, श्व: tomorrow, पुष्येण under Pushya star, द्विजोत्तमै: by eminent  brahmins, महता great, यौवराज्येन as heirapparent, अभिषेक्ष्यते is going to be coronated, कौशल्या such Kausalya, सुभगा खलु is fortunate indeed.  
2::8::10::सुमहतीम् very great, प्रीतिम् delight, प्राप्ताम् having obtained, प्रतीताम् renowned, हतद्विषम् with her enemies destroyed, तां कौशल्याम् that Kausalya, त्वम् you, दासीवत् like an attendant, कृताञ्जलि: with folded palms, उपस्थास्यसि will serve.
2::8::11::एवम् in this way, त्वम् you, अस्माभि: सह along with us, तस्या: for her, प्रेष्या an attendant,  भविष्यसि if you become, तव your, पुत्रश्च son also, रामस्य to Rama, प्रेष्यभावम् slavishness, गमिष्यति will attain.
2::8::12::रामस्य Rama's, परमा: स्त्रिय: all the women, हृष्टा: delighted, भविष्यन्ति खलु will become indeed, भरतक्षये with the decline of Bharata, ते your, स्नुषा: daughtersinlaw,  अप्रहृष्टा: deprived of happiness, भविष्यन्ति will become.
2::8::13::तत: after that, परम् highly, अप्रीताम् unhappy woman, ब्रुवन्तीम् speaking thus, ताम् that, मन्थराम् to Manthara, दृष्ट्वा having seen, देवी कैकेयी queen Kaikeyi, रामस्य गुणानेव the virtues of Rama, प्रशशंस ह praised.
2::8::14::राम: Rama, धर्मज्ञः knower of righteousness, गुरुभि: by elders, दान्त: selfrestrained, कृतज्ञ: grateful, सत्यवाक् truthful, शुचि: undefiled, राज्ञ: king's, ज्येष्ठ: eldest, सुत: son, अत: therefore, यौवराज्यम् as heirapparent, अर्हति is fit for.
2::8::15::दीर्घायु: blessed with a long life, भ्रातृ़न् his brothers, भृत्यांश्च and the servants, पितृवत् like a father, पालयिष्यति will rule, कुब्जे O hunchback, रामाभिषेचनम् Rama's coronation, श्रुत्वा having heard, कथम् why, सन्तप्यसे are grieving? 
2::8::16::वर्षशतात् hundred years, परम् beyond, पुरुषर्षभ: best of men, भरतश्चापि Bharata also, रामस्य Rama's, पितृपैतामहम् pertaining to fathers and grandfathers, राज्यम् kingdom, अवाप्ता will inherit.
2::8::17::मन्थरे O Manthara, सा त्वम् you, अभ्युदये prosperity, प्राप्ते affained, वर्तमाने च at present, कल्याणे wellbeing, भविष्यति will have in future, किमर्थम् why, परितप्यसे  are you grieving. 
2::8::18::मे to me, भरत: Bharata, यथा as, मान्य: worthy of consideration, राघव: son of the Raghus (Rama), तथा is so, भूय: अपि more so, स: he, माम् me, कौशल्यात: more than Kausalya, अतिरिक्तम् more, अनुशुश्रूषते हि is serving me.	 
2::8::19::रामस्य Rama's, राज्यं यदि if it is his kingdom, तत् that one, तदा then, भरतस्यापि Bharata's also, राघव: Rama, आत्मानम् own self, यथा as, भ्रातृ़ंश्च his brothers also, तथा in that way, मन्यते considers.
2::8::20::मन्थरा Manthara, कैकेयीवचनम् Kaikeyi's words, श्रुत्वा having heard, भृश दु:खिता very much unhappy, दीर्घम् deeply, उष्णं च and hot, विनिश्वस्य after heaving, कैकेयीम् addressing Kaikeyi, इदम् this word, अब्रवीत् said.
2::8::21::शोकव्यसनविस्तीर्णे widened with tears and troubles, दु:खसागरे in the ocean of sorrow, मज्जन्ती while you are sinking, मौर्ख्यात् out of stupidity, अनर्थदर्शिनी do not see (your own) wellbeing, आत्मानम् (your) own self, नावबुध्यसे you do not  perceive.
2::8::22::राघव: the scion of the Raghus (Rama), राजा as king, भविता will become, राघवस्य अनु suceeding Rama, य: who, सुत: (his) son( will become king), कैकेयि O Kaikeyi, भरत: तु on the contrary Bharata, राजवंशात् from royal dynasty, परिहास्यते will be debarred.
2::8::23::भामिनि O lovely lady, राज्ञ: king's, सुता: sons, सर्वे all, राज्ये in the kingdom, न तिष्ठन्ति हि will not succeed, सर्वेषु of all, स्थाप्यमानेषु are installed as kings, सुमहान् very great, अनय:  mismanagement, भवेत् will happen. 
2::8::24::अनवद्याङ्गि O one of beautiful limbs, कैकेयि Kaikeyi, तस्मात् for that reason, पार्थिवा: kings, ज्येष्ठे (either) in the eldest son, गुणवत्सु possessing virtues, इतरेष्वपि or in other sons, राज्यतन्त्राणि governance of a kingdom, स्थापयन्ति beston.
2::8::25::वत्सले O dear( Kaikeyi), तव your, असौ this, पुत्र: son, अनाथवत् like an orphan,  सुखेभ्य: च from comforts, राजवंशाच्च from royal succession, अत्यन्तनिर्भग्न: very much brokenhearted, भविष्यति will become.
2::8::26::सा अहम् such as me, त्वदर्थे in your interest, सम्प्राप्ता have come, त्वं तु nevertheless, you, माम् me, नावबुध्यसे do not understand, या whom, त्वम् you, सपत्निवृद्धौ on the occasion of  prosperity of your cowife, मे to me, प्रदेयं दातुम् to confer gift, इच्छसि wish.
2::8::27::राम: Rama, अकण्टकम् free from thorns (enemies), राज्यम् kingdom, प्राप्य having obtained, भरतम् Bharata, देशान्तरं वा out of the country, अथापि वा or else, लोकान्तरम् to the other world, नयिता he will send, ध्रुवम्  this is certain.
2::8::28::त्वया by you, भरत: Bharata, बाल: एव even as a child, मातुल्यम् maternal uncle's house, नायित: हि has been sent off, सन्निकर्षात् from proximity, स्थावरेष्वपि even among the immobile (inanimate) objects, सौहार्दम् friendliness, जायते  is created.
2::8::29::भरतस्य of Bharata, अनुवश: obedient, शत्रुघ्नोऽपि Satrughna also, समम् along with him, गत: has gone, लक्ष्मण: Lakshmana, रामम् to Rama, यथा as, असौ this Satrughna, तथा in that way, भरतम् to Bharata. 
2::8::30::वनजीविभि: by those living on the forest, छेत्तव्य: intended for felling, कश्चित् one such, द्रुम: tree, इषीकाभि: grass known as Ishika (thorny bushes), सन्निकर्षात् due to being in the close vicinity, परमात् from great, भयात् from fear, मोचित: set free, श्रूयते हि it is heard.
2::8::31::सौमित्रि: Lakshmana, रामम् Rama, गोप्ता हि surely going to protect, राघव: son of he Raghus (Rama), लक्ष्मणं चापि to Lakshmana also, अश्विनो: like of twin 'Ashwins', सौभ्रात्रं इव like brotherhood, तयो: their, लोकेषु in the worlds, विश्रृतम् is renowned.
2::8::32::तस्मात् therefore, राम: Rama, लक्ष्मणे to Lakshmana, पापम् harm, किञ्चित् even little, न करिष्यति will not do, भरते तु as to but in respect of Bharata, राम: Rama, पापम् harm, कुर्यात् will do, इति in this, न संशय: there is no doubt.
2::8::33::तस्मात् therefore, ते सुत: your son, राजगृहादेव from Rajagriha (the place of Bharata's maternal uncle) straightaway, वनम् to the forest, गच्छतु let go, एतत् that only, मह्यम् for me, रोचते हि alone is pleasing, तवापि च for you also, भृशम् highly, हितम् beneficial.
2::8::34::भरत: Bharata, धर्मात् righteously, पित्र्यम् relating to his father,राज्यम् kingdom, अवाप्स्यसि यदि if he secures, एवं चेत् if it happens that way, ते to you, ज्ञातिपक्षस्य चैव and also to your relations, श्रेय: welfare, भविष्यति will happen.
2::8::35::ते your, सुखोचित: accustomed to comforts, स: बाल: that young Bharata, रामस्य of Rama,  सहज:रिपु: is born enemy, नष्टार्थ: deprived of all wealth, समृद्धार्थस्य of prosperous (Rama), वशे under the control, कथम् how, जीविष्यति will live. 
2::8::36::अरण्ये in the forest, सिंहेन by a lion, अभिद्रुतम् being attacked, गजयूथपम्इव like the leader of the elephant herd, रामेण by Rama, प्रच्छाद्यमानम् being overpowered, भरतम् Bharata, त्रातुम् to save, अर्हसि it behoves you.
2::8::37::त्वया by you, सौभाग्यवत्तया being fortunate (being favourite wife of your husband), दर्पात् from pride, पूर्वम् earlier, निराकृता was slighted, ते your, सपत्नी cowife (Kausalya), राममाता Rama's mother, वैरम् grudge, कथम् how, न शातयेत् will not retaliate.
2::8::38::भामिनि O lovely lady, राम: Rama, यदा when, प्रभूतरत्नाकरशैलपत्तनाम् with its oceans, mountains and towns, पृथिवीम् to this earth, अवाप्स्यति secures, तदा then, भरतेन सहैव along with Bharata, दीना become miserable, अशुभम् disgrace, गमिष्यसि will attain.
2::8::39::राम: Rama, यदा हि when, पृथिवीम् this earth, अवाप्स्यति obtains, भरत: Bharata, ध्रृवम् certainly, प्रणष्ट: ruined, भविष्यति will become, अत: for that reason, आत्मजे your son, राज्यम् kingdom, अद्यैव right now, परस्य enemy Rama's, विवासकारणम् means of banishment, सञ्चिन्तय think over.
