2::89::1::Bharata got up at daybreak after spending the night on the bank of the Ganga at that very place where Rama, the descendent of Raghu, had stayed. And said these words to Satrughna:
2::89::2::O Satrughna, blessings to you Why are you still alseep? Arise fetch Guha the king of the nishadas quickly. He will ferry the army across the river.
2::89::3::Urged by his brother Bharata, Satrughna replied 'I am not asleep. I am awake. I am deeply thinking of our esteemed brother, Rama'
2::89::4::While the two lions among men, Bharata and Satrughna were thus conversing with each other, Guha came in the appropriate time and said to Bharata with folded palms: 
2::89::5::O scion of the Kakutstha race (Bharata) I trust, you and your army passed the night on the river bank comfortably without any inconvenience.
2::89::6::On hearing Guha's affectionate words Bharata, ever obedient to Rama, replied: 
2::89::7::O king (Guha) the night passed comfortably for us. We have been honoured by you in many ways. Let your fishermen be ordered to ferry us across the Ganga in their boats.
2::89::8::Then at Bharata's command Guha returned to his habitation quickly and said to his relations:
2::89::9::Arise and awake. May you be ever blessed. Haul down the boats into the river. We have to ferry the army (across the river).
2::89::10::On hearing these words, they arose in haste and immediately brought five hundred boats from every direction in accordance with the command of their king (Guha).
2::89::11::They brought excellent boats known as Swastika, solidly built, they lookd magnificent, filled with large bells, sails and flags. 
2::89::12::Then Guha personally brought an auspicious boat known as Swastika covered with white canvas and generating captivating sounds. 
2::89::13::The family priest (Vasistha) and other brahmins were the first to board. Next mighty Bharata and Satrughna, Kausalya, Sumitra, women of the palace including the other wives of the king and wagons and supplies followed.
2::89::14::The clamour of the people setting fire to the temporary shelters in that camp, descending down the river and transporting the supplies into the boats reached the heaven.
2::89::15::Those boats adorned with flags were propelled by the fishermen occupying them. They sailed with men rowing on board fast.
2::89::16::Some boats were filled with women, some others with horses. while still others transported draught animals for drawing carriages and the great treasures.
2::89::17::Having reached the other bank, the men disembarked. While returning, the fisherfolk exhibited their craft of lovely formations. 
2::89::18::The elephants, embellished with banners and goaded by their mahouts looked splendid like mountains with banners while crossing in the water.
2::89::19::Only some of the people were able to board the boats. Some others crossed on rafts and on large pots. Still others swam with their arms.
2::89::20::The auspicious army, ferried across the river Ganga by the fishermen, reached the great forest of Prayaga at the auspicious hour of Maitra.
2::89::21:: The noble Bharata, got his army encamped according to their pleasure and set out, accompanied by his priests, to see the distinguished sage Bharadwaja. 
2::89::22::Approaching the hermitage of Bharadwaja, the eminent brahmin and official priest of the gods, Bharata saw the delightful huts and trees of the charming great forest.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकोननवतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eightyninth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
