2::6::1::पुरोहिते the family priest, गते (सति) having gone, रामः Rama, स्नातः  bathed, नियतमानसः with  mind under control, विशालाक्ष्या largeeyed (large eyes are marks of beauty), पत्न्या सह with (his) wife, नारायणम् to (lord) Narayana, उपागमत् approached.
2::6::2::तदा then, हविषः of havis (clarified butter and other oblations), पात्रीम् a small vessel where in offerings are put, विधिवत् in accordance with ritual practices, शिरसा on the head, प्रगृह्य having held, ज्वलितेनले in flaming (sacred) fire, महते great, दैवताय for great divinity (Visnu), आज्यम् clarified butter, जुहाव offered oblations.
2::6::3::नरवरात्मजः son of the king (Rama), आत्मनः of his own, प्रियम् welfare, आशास्य seeking, तस्य हविषः of that havis, शेषं the remainder, प्राश्य च having partaken, देवम्  नारायणम् God Narayana, ध्यायन् meditating upon, वाग्यतः भूत्वा adopting silence, नियतमानसः with restrained mind, विष्णोः Visnu's, श्रीमति (at the) auspicious, आयतने in the temple, स्वास्तीर्णे with wellspread, कुशसंस्तरे in the bed of kusha grass, वैदेह्या सह along with Vaidehi (Sita), शिश्ये slept.
2::6::4::सः he, रात्र्याम् at night, एकयामावशिष्टायाम् with one yama (measure of time equivalent to four hours) left, प्रतिविबुद्ध्य having awakened, वेश्मनः dwelling's, कृत्स्नम् entire, अलङ्कारविधिम् decoration, कारयामास got it done.
2::6::5::तत्र there (in the last watch of the night), सूतमागधवन्दिनाम् of bards and panegyrists, सुखाः pleasant, वाचः words, श्रृण्वन् listening, पूर्वां सन्ध्याम् early morning rites, उपासीनः had attended, यतमानसः with controlled mind, जजाप chanted (Gayatri).
2::6::6::शिरसा with head, प्रणत: bowed low, मधुसूदनम् Lord Visnu, तुष्टाव extoled, विमलक्षौमसंवीतः  dressed in spotless silk garments, द्विजान् to brahmins, वाचयामास got the purificatory mantras recited.
2::6::7::अथ then, तेषाम् their, गम्भीरमधुरः deep and sweet, पुण्याहघोषः proclamations of 'this is an auspicious day', तूर्यघोषानुनादितः reverberating with the sounds of trumpets, तदा then, अयोध्याम् (the city of) Ayodhya, पूरयामास filled.
2::6::8::तदा then, राघवम् to the scion of the Raghus (Rama), वैदेह्या सह along with the princess of Videha, (Sita), कृतोपवासम् had undertaken the fast, श्रुत्वा having heard, अयोध्यानिलयः  residents of Ayodhya, सर्वः all, जनः men, प्रमुदितः rejoiced.
2::6::9::ततः afterwards, सर्वः all, पौरजनः citizens, रामाभिषेचनम् consecration of Rama, श्रुत्वा having heard, रजनीम् the night, प्रभाताम् brightened into dawn, दृष्ट्वा having seen, पुरीम् the city, शोभयितुम् to decorate, चक्रे made (commenced).
2::6::10::सिताभ्रशिखराभेषु among those bright peaks wreathed by a mass of white clouds, देवतायतनेषु in the temples, चतुष्पथेषु at the crossroads, रथ्यासु on the thoroughfares, चैत्येषु on the tall trees dotting the avenues, अट्टालकेषु च on the towers too, नानापण्यसमृद्धेषु abounding in various kinds of merchandise, वणिजाम् of merchants, आपणेषु च in the stalls also, कुटुम्बिनाम् of householders, समृद्धेषु in prosperous (places), श्रीमत्सु in graceful, भवनेषु च in the houses, सर्वासु in all, सभासु public halls, आलक्षितेषु seen from distances, वृक्षेषु on the trees, तदा then, ध्वजाः banners, चित्राः varying colours, पताकाः च flags, too, समुच्छ्रिचिताः were erected अभवन् became.
2::6::11::ततस्ततः here and there, नटनर्तकसङ्घानाम् of troupes of actors and dancers, गायताम् of singers, गायकानां च also of songsters, मनः कर्णसुखाः pleasing to the mind and ears, वाचः words, शुश्रुवुः heard.
2::6::12::रामाभिषेके as the coronation of Rama, संप्राप्ते approached, जना: the people, चत्वरेषु at the public squares, गृहेषु च in the private houses, मिथः with one another, रामाभिषेकयुक्ताः concerning Rama's coronation, कथाः talk, चक्रुः made.
2::6::13::एवम् thus, गृहद्वारेषु in the doorways, सङ्घशः in groups, क्रीडमानाः playing, बालाः अपि children also, मिथः with each other, रामाभिषवसंयुक्ताः relating to the coronation of Rama, कथाः stories, चक्रुः made.
2::6::14::रामाभिषेचने on the occasion of Rama's coronation, पौरैः by citizens, राजमार्गः highways, कृतपुष्पोपहारश्च strewn with flowers , धूपगन्धाधिवासितः fragrant with incense, श्रीमान् glorious, कृतः made.
2::6::15::तथा so also, अनु connected with if, निशागमनशङ्कया lest night should fall, प्रकाशकरणार्थम् to light it up, रथ्यासु in the streets, सर्वशः all over, दीपवृक्षान् lamps in the shape of trees, चक्रुः improvised.
2::6::16::तत्पुरवासिनः inhabitants of the city, सर्वे all of them, एवम् thus, पुरस्य city's, अलङ्कारम् decoration, कृत्वा having made, रामस्य Rama's, यौवराज्याभिषेचनम् coronation as heirapparent, आकाङ्क्षमाणाः eagerly desiring, चत्वरेषु at the public squares, सभासु च in the assembly halls, सङ्घशः in groups, समेत्य having assembled, तत्र there, मिथः mutually, कथयन्तः conversing, जनाधिपम् to the lord of men (Dasaratha), प्रशशंसुः praised.
2::6::17::यः that king, आत्मानम् himself, वृद्धम्  aged, ज्ञात्वा having realised, रामम् to Rama, राज्ये in the kingdom, अभिषेक्ष्यति is going to install, अयम् this, इक्ष्वाकुकुलनन्दनः causing delight to the Ikshvaku race, राजा king , महात्मा highsouled, अहो oh.
2::6::18::यत् indeed, दृष्टलोकपरावरः who has seen the world's high and low, रामः Rama, महीपतिः as king, चिराय for a long time, नः for us, गोप्ता protector, भविता shall become, सर्वेऽपि all of us, अनुगृहीताः स्म are favoured.
2::6::19::अनुद्धतमनाः one who is not arrogant, विद्वान् learned, धर्मात्मा a pious soul, भ्रातृवत्सलः  affectionate towards his brothers, राघवः scion of the Raghus (Rama), भ्रातृषु in brothers, यथा like, स्निग्धः friendly, अस्मास्वपि even in us, तथा in that manner.
2::6::20::यत्प्रसादेन by whose grace, अभिषिक्तम् having been coronated, रामम् of Rama, द्रक्ष्यामहे we are beholding, धर्मात्मा virtuous, अनघः sinless, दशरथः राजा king Dasaratha, चिरम् for long, जीवतु let live.
2::6::21::श्रुतवृत्तान्ताः having heard the story, दिग्भ्यः अपि from all quarters also, प्राप्ताः had arrived, जानपदाः जनाः village folk, तदा then, एवं विधम् in this manner, पौराणाम् of citizens, कथयताम् while conversing, शुश्रुवुः heard.
2::6::22::रामाभिषेचनम् coronation of Rama, द्रष्टुम् to behold, दिग्भ्यः from different directions, पुरम् the city, प्राप्ताः have arrived, ते those, जानपदाः villagers, जनाः men, रामस्य Rama's, पुरीम् city, पूरयामासुः filled.
2::6::23::विसर्पद्भि: by those moving to and fro, तैः जनौघैः by those multitudes of men, तत्र there, निस्वनः noise, पर्वसु on the full and new moon days, उदीर्णवेगस्य with violent speed, सागरस्य of the ocean, निस्वनः इव like the sound, शुश्रुवे was heard.
2::6::24::दिदृक्षुभिः wishing to see, उपागतैः arrived, जानपदैः villagers, समन्ततः every side, आकुलम् crowded, सस्वनम् with sounds, इन्द्रक्षयसन्निभम् resembling the abode of Indra, तत् that, पुरम् city, समुद्रयादोभिः with aquatic animals, अर्णवोदकम् इव like water of the ocean, बभौ shone.
