2::59::1::Listening to the charioteer, the best of ministers (Sumantra), the king asked him to tell the rest.
2::59::2::Having heard him, Sumantra, overcome with tears, related further details of Rama's message.
2::59::3::O King the heroes in bark robes and with matted hair crossed the Ganga and proceeded towards Prayaga.
2::59::4::Lakshmana walked ahead guarding Rama, the delight of the Raghus. While I returned helplessly seeing them go. 
2::59::5:: When Rama set out for the forest, and I turned back, my horses shedding hot tears were reluctant to walk the path.
2::59::6::Thereafter, controlling my grief and paying obeisance to both the princes with folded palms, I ascended the chariot and returned.
2::59::7::There along with Guha I waited for (three) days that Rama might call me back.
2::59::8::O great king even trees with their flowers, buds and shoots throughout your empire have withered because of the calamity on Rama.
2::59::9:: Water in rivers, ponds and lakes has heated up while all the foliage in the forests and gardens have shrivelled.
2::59::10::No living being move about and even wild animals roam no more. Overwhelmed with grief on account of Rama a great silence pervades the forest. 
2::59::11::The water in the lotus lakes, O king, has become turbid. The blue lotuses have withered and their shrivelled petals are submerged in water. The fishes and aquatic birds are hidden under waters.
2::59::12::Bunches of flowers grown in water and on land, as well as fruits with their scant fragrance do not shine as before.
2::59::13::Pleasuregardens are all deserted as the birds have vanished. O best of men, as such they do not look beautiful. 
2::59::14::None greeted me when I entered Ayodhya, People heaved sighs repeatedly when they did not see Rama.
2::59::15::Beholding the royal chariot arrive without Rama, all were on the highway shedding tears of anguish.
2::59::16::When the women from mansions, sevenstoried buildings and from royal palaces saw the chariot without Rama, they, overwhelmed with sorrow, cried, 'Alas, Alas'.
2::59::17::The women, with their large, bright eyes flooded with gushing tears looked in silence at one another in deep anguish.
2::59::18::I did not see any difference in the degree of anguish among friends, those who are not friends and and those who are indifferent. (The degree of agony was same in all).
2::59::19::O maharaja, Ayodhya is filled with cheerless people with deep sighs, agonised voices and pale faces depressed and distressed due to Rama's exile. (Even) elephants and horses look spiritless. For me it (the city) resembles (dejected) Kausalya deprived of her son.
2::59::20::At these words of the charioteer, the king in deep distress replied with a voice choked with tears: 
2::59::21::Incited by Kaikeyi of sinful relations and sinful motive, I did not consult expert, elderly counsellers. 
2::59::22::For the sake of a woman, this act was committed in great haste, without consulting friends or ministers or men of prudence.
2::59::23::Surely it is destiny and this calamity has befallen for the wilful destruction of the (entire) race, O charioteer 
2::59::24::O Charioteer, if ever I have rendered you any favour, quickly  take me to Rama. My life is hastening me (fast running out).
2::59::25::If my command prevails today, Rama may be brought back. Without Rama I cannot live for a moment even. 
2::59::26::Otherwise if (you think) the mightyarmed (Rama) has gone too far then quickly put me in the chariot, and show me Rama (Carry me to him).
2::59::27::Where is that Rama, elder brother to Lakshmana who has wellshaped teeth and wields a mighty bow? If I can see him along with Sita I will survive.
2::59::28::If I cannot see Rama of redcoloured eyes, the mightyarmed one and wearing earrings bedecked with precious stones I shall surely go to the abode of Yama, the god of death.
2::59::29::What else can be of greater sorrow to me who having reached this state, am still unable to see Rama?
2::59::30::Ah Rama, Ah Lakshmana, Ah unfortunate Vaidehi, you do not know that I am dying  like an orphan because of my grief.
2::59::31::The king whose mind was extremely enfeebled due to grief and who was immersed in a sea of tears which he was unable to cross continued: 
2::59::32::O queen Kausalya, I am completely immersed in this ocean of sorrow. The misfortune due to Rama's separation is its breadth. Sita's separation is the other end of the shore. Sighs are its turbulent waves and whirlpools. Tears are its foam and turbid waters. Waving of arms is its fishes. Cries of agony are its roars. My dishevelled hair is its moss. Kaikeyi is the mouth of Badaba. My copious tears are its source. Words of the hunchback (Manthara) are the monstrous crocodiles. The cruel boons to Kaikeyi are its shores. Without Rama I cannot cross  this sea of sorrow alive. Ah, what a pity
2::59::33::Though I wish I cannot see Rama together with Lakshmana. Indeed this is very unfortunate. Lamenting thus, king Dasaratha of great reknown fell on the bed, unconscious. 
2::59::34::Wailing, Dasaratha fell unconscious. He was doubly grieved due to his yearning for Rama. Rama's mother was seized with fear hearing those lamentations.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends  the fiftyninth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
