2::74::1::Overtaken by great wrath, Bharata reproached his mother and then said to her again:
2::74::2::O cruel Kaikeyi of wicked conduct, you may be deprived of the kingdom. Abandoned by righteousness, you shall be weeping for me after my death.
2::74::3:: Death for the king and exile for Rama, similar fate for both, have befallen on your account. What possible harm, either the king or the highly virtuous Rama has done to you?
2::74::4::O Kaikeyi by destroying this race you have earned the demerit of killing an embryo and shall enter hell. You shall never attain the same state of living, in the  afterworld of your husband.
2::74::5::That by doing this horrible deed you have committed a great sin of renouncing Rama, the beloved of all worlds. Therefore I am overtaken by fear.
2::74::6:: You have caused my father's death and Rama's exile. As for me, I have obtained ignominy in this world.
2::74::7::O cruel woman, O woman of vicious character you are an enemy assuming a mother's form, lustful for kingdom. You are a murderess (of your husband) and I shall never speak to you.
2::74::8:: As you have vitiated the race, my mothers Kausalya and Sumitra are overwhelmed with great sorrow. 
2::74::9:: As you sent virtuous Rama, ever devoted to truth, into the forest, my father died out of grief (due to separation from  his son). Therefore, you are not the true daughter of the righteous and sagacious king Aswapati but a demoness born there to destroy your father's race.
2::74::10:: The sin you have committed with a particular objective has affected me and (as a result) I am left without my father. I am abandoned by my brothers. I am hated by every one in this entire world.
2::74::11:: O woman of sinful convictions you will go to hell. You have separated righteous Kausalya from her son. For having committed such a sin, what afterworld awaits you  (is not known)?
2::74::12::O cruel one why do you not realise that Rama, born of Kausalya, is the eldest son and equal to my father? He is selfrestrained and a refuge to his kith and kin.
2::74::13::A son born from every limb, big or small, and from the heart is the most beloved of all for his mother while the other relatives are only loving ones.  
2::74::14::It is said that once upon a time Surabhi, the divine cow, highly respected by the gods and conversant with righteous ways, beheld her two sons who fainted due to fatigue while carrying the burden of the ploughs.
2::74::15::On seeing her two sons lying on earth exhausted, she wailed in distress for them with her eyes filled with tears.
2::74::16:: The fine drops of her fragnant tears trickled down the body of the great king of the gods (Indra).
2::74::17::When Indra, lord of the gods, saw those tears of holy fragrance fallen on his body he understood that the tears were shed by the venerated Kamadhenu.
2::74::18:: While looking around Indra beheld Kamadhenu in intense pain stationed in the sky,   looking distressed and miserable, and wailing.
2::74::19:: The king of the gods, Indra, wielder of thunderbolt, saw the renowned Kamadhenu consumed with grief. Alarmed, he said to her with palms joined in reverence:
2::74::20:: 'O holy cow fear not. You wish the welfare of all, Has any great calamity befallen us from any quarter? I hope not. What is the reason for your sorrow? Tell me'. 
2::74::21::On hearing the sagacious Indra, king of the gods, Kamadhenu, proficient in speech, calmly replied:
2::74::22::'God forbid, O Indra, lord of the Immortals no calamity has befallen you from any quarter. Only I am in trouble. I am weeping for these pair of bulls, my own sons who are in difficulty. When I see them scorched by the rays of the Sun, miserable, emaciated and weeping, beaten by a ploughman, I am immersed in grief'.
2::74::23::'These bulls were born from my body and they are oppressed by the burden. Having seen their anguish, I am extremely grieved. There is none so dear as a son'.
2::74::24::The wishfulfilling cow (Kamadhenu) had innumerable sons spread all over the world. When Indra saw that Kamadhenu too was weeping for her sons, he concluded 'there is no one greater than a son'.
2::74::25::Wishing always to nourish the worlds Kamadhenu conducts herself with an unequalled character. In accordance with her nature, she has imbibed in herself eminent virtues. She is endowed with all prosperity. In spite of her thousand sons, she is weeping thus for her two bulls, what can one say of Kausalya separated from her only son Will she be her normal self again?'
2::74::26::This pious lady is blessed with only one son and (now) has been rendered childless by you. Therefore, you shall experience grief in this world and hereafter. 
2::74::27:: As for me, I shall do whatever is necessary for the atonement of the improper conduct shown towards my father and brother and for enhancement of my fame. There is no doubt  about it.
2::74::28::If I fail to bring back the mighty son of  Kausalya, I shall enter the forest frequented by ascetics.
2::74::29:: O vicious one, O evilintentioned one being watched by the citizens with their throats choked with tears of grief, I cannot endure the burden of the sin committed by you.
2::74::30:: Jump into the fire or go to Dandaka forest or hang yourself. There is no other recourse for you.
2::74::31::When Rama who has truth as his prowess accepts the kingdom, I shall have accomplished my purpose at last and I shall be free from all blemishes. 
2::74::32::In this way like an elephant driven by prods and goads in the forest, highly enraged Bharata hissing like a serpent dropped down on the ground.
2::74::33::Prince Bharata, the scorcher of enemies, with bloodshot eyes, raiment in disarray, ornaments tossed about lay fallen on the ground like the banner of Indra (husband of Sachi) at the close of the festival of flaghoisting.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुस्सप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventyfourth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
