2::13::1::अनर्थरूपा misfortune incarnate, सिद्धार्था with her purpose fulfilled, अङ्गना that woman, अतदर्हम् who did not merit such treatment, अतथोचितम् who was not accustomed to that (treatment), पुण्यान्ते after exhausting the merits (earned), देवलोकात् from the heaven, परिच्युतम् fallen, ययातिमिव like Yayati, शयानम् lying, महाराजम्  to the maharaja (Dasaratha), अभीता fearless, भयदर्शिनी displaying fear, पुनः again, तमेव वरम् those very boons, आकारयामास urged.
2::13::2::अनर्थरूपा misfortune incarnate, सिद्धार्था with her purpose fulfilled, अङ्गना that woman, अतदर्हम् who did not merit such treatment, अतथोचितम् who was not accustomed to that (treatment), पुण्यान्ते after exhausting the merits (earned), देवलोकात् from the heaven, परिच्युतम् fallen, ययातिमिव like Yayati, शयानम् lying, महाराजम्  to the maharaja (Dasaratha), अभीता fearless, भयदर्शिनी displaying fear, पुनः again, तमेव वरम् those very boons, आकारयामास urged.
2::13::3::महाराज O maharaja, सत्यवादी truthful, दृढव्रतः steadfast in your vows, त्वम् you, कत्थसे used to boast of, मम my, इमं वरम् this boon, कस्मात् why, विधारयितुम् to avoid, इच्छसि are seeking?
2::13::4::तदा then, कैकेय्या by Kaikeyi, एवम् in this way, उक्तः having said, राजा दशरथः king Dasaratha, क्रुद्धः in indignation, मुहूर्तम् for a while, विह्वलन्निव as if in a state of delirium, ततः afterwards, प्रत्युवाच replied.
2::13::5::मनुजपुङ्गवे foremost among men, रामे Rama, वनंगते exiled, मयि me, मृते being dead, अनार्ये O ignoble woman मम अमित्रे my enemy, सकामा having satisfied your desire, सुखिनी भव be happy, हन्त alas.
2::13::6::स्वर्गेऽपि even in heaven, अहम् I, प्रत्यादेशात् with repudiation, अभिहितम् stated, रामस्य about Rama's, कुशलम् welfare, दैवतैः by gods, कथं खलु how, धारयिष्ये will I hold (convince), बत what a catastrophe.
2::13::7::कैकेय्याः of Kaikeyi, प्रियकामेन for the pleasure, मया by me, रामः Rama, प्रव्राजितः was sent (to the forest), एतत् this, सत्यम् truth, ब्रवीमि यदि if I tell, तत् that, असत्यम् untruth, भविष्यति will become.
2::13::8::अपुत्रेण without sons, मया by me, महता with great, श्रमेण with effort, महान् mighty, महाबाहुः     mightyarmed, रामः Rama, पुत्रः as son, लब्ध: obtained, सः he, मया by me, कथम् how, त्यज्यते can be abandoned.
2::13::9::शूरः brave, कृतविद्यश्च learned also, जितक्रोधः one who has subdued anger, क्षमापरः forgiving, कमलपत्राक्षः one with eyes resembling lotus petals, रामः Rama, मया by me, कथम् how, विवास्यते can be sent on exile.
2::13::10::इन्दीवरश्यामम् complexion resembling blue lotus, दीर्घबाहुम् one with long arms, महाबलम् one with immense strength, अभिरामम् a charming person, रामम् to Rama, अहम् I, दण्डकान् to Dandaka, कथम् how, प्रेषयिष्यामि can despatch.
2::13::11::सुखानाम् happiness, उचितस्य deserves, दुःखैः sufferings, अनुचितस्य च does not deserve, धीमतः sagacious, रामस्य to Rama, दुःखम् distress, कथं नाम how, अनुपश्येयम् can I bear to see
2::13::12::अदुःखार्हस्य one who does not deserve suffering, रामस्य of Rama, दुःखम् sorrow, अकृत्वा not inflicting, मम my, संक्रमणम् reaching death, अद्य now, भवेत् if it happens, ततः therefrom, सुखम् happiness, अवाप्नुयाम् I shall experience.
2::13::13::नृशंसे O cruel one पापसङ्कल्पे O woman of evil intentions कैकेयि Kaikeyi, मम my, प्रियम् dear, सत्यपराक्रमम् truth as prowess, रामम् to Rama, विप्रियेण harmful, किम् why, योजयसे arranging, लोके in this world, मे to me, अतुला unequalled, अकीर्तिः infamy, परिभवश्च disgrace, ध्रुवं this is inevitable.
2::13::14::परिभ्रमितचेतसः with a whirling mind, तस्य of that Dasaratha, तथा in that way, विलपतः lamenting सूर्यः the Sun, अस्तमभ्यगमत् set, रजनी च night also, अभ्यवर्तत च fell.
2::13::15::तथा in that way, आर्त्तस्य of the anguished, विलपमानस्य while he was lamenting, राज्ञः of the  king, त्रियामा with three yamas, सा that, शर्वरी night, चन्द्रमण्डलमण्डिता adorned with the lunar orb, न व्यभासत did not shine.
2::13::16::वृद्धः aged, दशरथः नृपः king Dasaratha, तथैव in that way only, उष्णम् hot, विनिश्श्वस्य heaving sighs, आर्तवत् like a sick man, गगनासक्तलोचनः looked at the sky with a fixed gaze, दुःखम् pitiably, विललाप lamented.
2::13::17::नक्षत्रभूषणे adorned with stars, भद्रे O auspiciouslooking one, निशे O Night त्वया by you, प्रभातम् dawn, न इच्छामि I do not desire, मे to me, दया kindness, क्रियताम् be done, मया by me, अयम् this, अञ्जलिः with palms folded, रचितः is held.
2::13::18::अथवा or, शीघ्रम् quickly, गम्यताम् let it go, यत्कृते for whose sake, महत् great, व्यसनम् misfortune, निर्घृणाम् merciless, नृशंसाम् malicious, कैकयीम् Kaikeyi, द्रष्टुम् to look at, अहम् I, नेच्छामि do not desire.
2::13::19::राजा king, एवम् thus, उक्त्वा having said, ततः then, संयताञ्जलिः with folded hands,  कैकेयीम् to  Kaikeyi, प्रसादयामास appeased, पुनः again, कैकेयीम् to Kaikeyi, इदं च this word also, अब्रवीत् spoke.
2::13::20::भद्रे O gentle lady, देवि O queen, साधुवृत्तस्य having good conduct, दीनस्य of this wretch, त्वद्गतस्य devoted to you, गतायुषः of a man whose life is almost over, विशेषतः especially, राज्ञः as a king, प्रसादः favour, क्रियताम् let it be done.
2::13::21::सुश्रोणि fairhipped lady, मया by me, इदम् all this, शून्ये in the sky, न खलु समुदाहृतम् indeed has not been told, बाले O young lady, मे to me, साधु very well, प्रसादम् favour, कुरु do, सहृदया असि हि surely you are kindhearted.
2::13::22::देवि O queen, प्रसीद be pleased, रामः Rama, त्वद्दत्तम् given by you, मे राज्यम् my kingdom, लभताम् will receive, असितापाङ्गे O one with dark eyelashes, परम् very great, यशः fame, अवाप्नुहि acquire.
2::13::23::गुरुश्रोणि O one with heavy hips चारुमुखेक्षणे having charming eyes and a beautiful face, मम for me, रामस्य of Rama, लोकस्य of the world, गुरूणाम् to all the preceptors, भरतस्य च of Bharata also, प्रियम् pleasing, एतत् this act, कुरु do.
2::13::24::सुदुष्टभावा a lady with wicked thoughts, नृशंसा heartless, विशुद्धभावस्य of pure (kind) feeling, ताम्रेक्षणस्य of one with eyes rendered red, अश्रुकलस्य filled with tears, भर्तुः husband, राज्ञः king's, विचित्रम् in various ways, करुणं विलापम् piteous wailing, श्रुत्वा having heard, वाक्यं that word, न चकार did not obey.
2::13::25::पुत्रस्य son's, विवासनं प्रति about banishment, प्रतिकूलभाषिणीम् speaking the opposite, अतुष्टाम् not satisfied, प्रियाम् beloved wife, समीक्ष्य having seen, दुःखितः struck with grief, ततः thereafter, सः राजा that king, पुनरेव again, मूर्छितः having fainted, विसंज्ञः losing consciousness, क्षितौ on the ground (floor), निपपात fell down. 
2::13::26::इतीव like this, व्यथितस्य afflicted with grief, मनस्विनः of that highminded, राज्ञः of king, घोरम् dreadful, श्वसतः heaving deep sighs, सा निशा that night, जगाम passed off, सः राजसत्तमः that eminent king, विबोध्यमानः being awakened (by panegyrists), तदा then, प्रतिबोधनम् not to awaken, निवारयामास stopped.
