2::51::1::Deeply moved to see Lakshmana, scion of the Raghus, keeping awake all night without any pretence for his brother's sake, Guha spoke.
2::51::2::O dear prince this comfortable bed has been arranged for you. Rest happily on this bed.
2::51::3::We are used to all kinds of suffering and you, to comfort. We will keep vigil during the night for the protection of Rama, descendant of the Kakutsthas.
2::51::4::For me, there is none dearer than Rama in this world. I speak the truth. I swear by truth. 
2::51::5::I am seeking supreme fame in this world through the attainment of dharma and acquisition of abundant artha by the grace of Rama alone.
2::51::6::I along with my kinsmen, bow in hand, will protect my dear friend, Rama with Sita from every side.
2::51::7::Wandering about in this forest all the time there is nothing unknown to me (here). We can withstand even  a vast army of four divisions.
2::51::8::Lakshmana said to Guha, O sinless one when all of us are under your righteous protection we have nothing to fear.
2::51::9::When Rama, son of Dasaratha, sleeps on the ground with Sita how can I sleep or live or enjoy pleasures?
2::51::10::Look at that Rama whom all the gods and demons cannot face in war sleeps so comfortably on the grass with Sita.
2::51::11::This favourite son of Dasaratha who has similar traits like his father was born after he rigorously practised austerities accompanied by (Vedic) mantras. When he is banished, the king will not live long. Surely this land will soon be widowed.
2::51::12::All the women having cried so much must have quietened down out of sheer exhaustion. That is why perhaps the sounds from the royal palace have ceased. 
2::51::13:: I doubt whether all of them -- the king, Kausalya and my mother -- can survive this night.
2::51::14::My mother may live looking forward to Satrughna. But, alas Kausalya may die, separated from her valiant son. 
2::51::15::That city (of Ayodhya) is full of loyal people. It brings them happiness. It is dear to them. It will perish due to the sad demise of the king.
2::51::16:: How can the noble king survive unable to see his highsouled, beloved, eldest son?
2::51::17::Subsequent to the death of the king, Kausalya will die and my mother will follow her.
2::51::18::Past is past (irreversible). My father, brooding over his desire of installing Rama as king unfulfilled, will perish.
2::51::19::Those who will remain present around the king, my father, at the time of his death and perform the funeral rites have their desires fulfilled (for they could attend the king's obsequies).
2::51::20::They will roam about happily in the capital city of my father with its lovely squares, wellaligned broad highways, its mansions and palaces, full of chariots, elephants, horses. It will be echoing with the sound of trumpets. It will be full of the welfare of all. It will be graced by the fairest of courtesans. Filled with wellnourished and contented people, the city dotted with several pleasuregardens and parks, will look splendid with community festivals and fairs. 
2::51::21::Will the king be still alive? Will we see the noble king again on our return from exile after the fulfilment of his vows? 
2::51::22::Will we ever be able, after completion of the exile, to enter the city of Ayodhya along with Rama who is true to his promise? 
2::51::23::While that noble prince (Lakshmana), tormented with grief, stood thus wailing, the night passed off. 
2::51::24::Out of great friendship with Guha, Lakshmana thus told the true story of prince (Rama) in the interest of his subject (Guha). (On hearing it) Guha was deeply afflicted with grief and pain and began shedding tears like an elephant suffering from fever.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्यकाण्डे एकपञ्चाश स्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyfirst sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
