2::96::1::Rama showed Sita, the princess of Mithila the river Mandakini flowing in the mountain, gratified her by offering meat (to eat) and sat on the mountain slope.
2::96::2::Offering Sita several kinds of preparations to eat, righteous Rama, seated in her company remarked, This meat is savoury, this meat roasted on fire is sacred.
2::96::3::Now as Rama was sitting there, the tumult and the dust raised by the approaching army of Bharata reached the sky.
2::96::4::Meanwhile, the mighty leaders of the elephantherds were agitated, and frightened by the loud noise, fled away from there in different directions.
2::96::5::Rama heard the sound generated by the army and saw those leaders of herds fleeing away.
2::96::6::Seeing those animals fleeing and hearing the clamour, Rama addressed Lakshmana,  son of Sumitra, who was blazing with energy.
2::96::7::O Lakshmana, the worthy son of Sumitra, fearful and tumultuous clamour like rumbling sound of clouds is heard. What a wonder Go and see.
2::96::8::Herds of elephants and buffaloes in the great woods and wild beasts frightened by lions are running in different directions.
2::96::9::O Lakshmana, do ascertain if any king or prince has come for hunting or whether any ferocious animal has entered this forest, shouldn't you?
2::96::10::O Lakshmana, this mountain is highly inaccessible even to birds. Find out exactly and quickly what this is all about.
2::96::11::Lakshmana hurriedly climbed a flowering sala tree, surveyed in all directions and fixed his gaze on the east.
2::96::12::Turning his face to the north, he beheld a vast army consisting of chariots, elephants and horses and a wellequipped infantry.
2::96::13::He (Lakshmana) informed Rama about the army full of horses and elephants and decorated with chariotbanners and said these words:
2::96::14::O noble one, put out the sacred fire (Agnihotra) and let Sita take refuge in the cave. String your bow and keep the arrows ready. Put on your armour.
2::96::15::Rama the best among men replied to Lakshamana, Oh, Lakshmana, look properly and tell me to whom do you think this army might belong  
2::96::16::Hearing the words of Rama, enraged Lakshmana, like a flaming fire as if he would reduce the army to ashes, replied: 
2::96::17::It is evident that Kaikeyi's son Bharata, who has been consecrated, is coming to slay both of us desiring the prosperous kingdom (to be without obstacles).
2::96::18::There on that chariot, is a banner shining brilliantly with the emblem of a lofty majestic Kovidara tree with a large trunk.
2::96::19::There the emblem of the great Kovidara tree of very large trunk spread with many branches shines brilliantly atop the chariot.
2::96::20::These men mounted on swiftlymoving horses are following the post. The riders of elephants  mounted on the elephants look cheerful.
2::96::21::O mighty warrior, let both of us take up the bows and station ourselves on this mountain or we shall stay here itself armed with weapons fully prepared for the battle.
2::96::22::O Rama, will this Kovidara emblem come into our possession in the battle? Can I see Bharata, the cause of the calamity that has befallen you, Sita and me?
2::96::23::O that mighty warrior Bharata, on whose account you have been banished from the perpetual kingdom, comes here as a foe and as for me, he deserves to be slain.
2::96::24::O Rama, I do not see anything  wrong in slaying Bharata. In killing one who had done harm is not an act of unrighteousness.
2::96::25::O Rama, Bharata has abandoned righteousness and has harmed you. When he is slain, you shall rule over the whole earth.
2::96::26::Let that Kaikeyi, greedy for the kingdom, see in great anguish her son who shall be slain by me today in a battle like a tree felled by an elephant.
2::96::27::I shall also slay Kaikeyi with her attendants and relations. Let the earth be cleansed of the great sin today.
2::96::28::O protector of honour, today I shall vent my suppressed anger and dishonour on the enemy's army like a fire on the thicket.
2::96::29::Today I shall rend the bodies of enemies with my sharpened arrows and spatter the forest of Chitrakuta mountain with their blood.
2::96::30::Let the wild beasts drag away the elephants, horses and men to be killed by me with their hearts transfixed with my arrows.
2::96::31::Having slain Bharata and his army in this great forest, I shall doubtless discharge my debt to my arrows and bow. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षण्णवतितमस्सर्गः।Thus ends the ninetysixth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
