2::18::1::Rama beheld his father reclined on an auspicious couch and by his side was seated Kaikeyi. He looked wretched with a pale face.
2::18::2::With all humility and wellcomposed mind, he made reverential salutation first at his father's feet and thereafter at Kaikeyi's.
2::18::3::Dasaratha uttered the word 'Rama', but thereafter could neither say any more in  distress nor look at him becuase his eyes were brimming with tears.
2::18::4::Never before did Rama see such frightful appearance of his father. He was seized with fear as if  he trampled a serpent.
2::18::5::Maharaja (Dasaratha) with his senses dulled had become emaciated due to sorrow and suffering. With an agitated and troubled mind, he was breathing heavily. Although unshakable, he looked agitated like an ocean with successive rows of waves, like  the  Sun in eclipse, like an ascetic who has uttered falsehood. 
2::18::6::The more Rama reflected on the incomprehensible sorrow of the king, the more he became perturbed like an ocean on the new Moon day.
2::18::7::Devoted to his father's wellbeing, Rama reflected, Why does not father reciprocate my greeting (like on other days)?
2::18::8::On other occasions even though angry he would feel pleased. But today  why does he feel sad even after seeing me?
2::18::9::With a sorrowful countenance Rama made salutation to Kaikeyi and said like a wretch tormented with grief:
2::18::10::Have I committed any offence unknowingly? Please tell me why my father is angry with me. You alone can pacify him.
2::18::11::Father has always been affectionate to me but today why is he in a dejected mood?  Why does his countenance look pale and wretched? Why does he not speak to me?
2::18::12:: Is he suffering from any physical ailment or mental agony? It is affliction of either the body or the mind. (For) perpetual happiness is indeed rare. 
2::18::13::Has any misfortune befallen the handsome Bharata or the mighty Satrughna or any of my mothers?
2::18::14::If I have (ever) displeased the maharaja, my father or disobeyed his command which has angered him, I do not wish to live for a moment৷৷ 
2::18::15::How can a man who owes his origin (birth) in this world to him (father) who still exists as a visible god not conduct himself (as per his wish)? 
2::18::16::Have you said anything harsh to my father out of anger or (injured) selfrespect for which his mind has been shaken? 
2::18::17::O Devi I am repeatedly asking you the cause of this unprecedented change in the king please tell me the truth.
2::18::18::When Kaikeyi was thus asked by the magnanimous scion of the Raghus (Rama) she uttered unashamed these impudent words in her own interest. 
2::18::19::O Rama, the king is neither angry, nor has any misforturne befallen him. But out of fear for you he is not able to speak out what he has in mind. 
2::18::20::The goddess of speech does not permit him to say an unpleasant thing to you for you are his beloved son. So you must fulfil the promise he has made to me. 
2::18::21::In the past the king had honoured me with (two) boons. Now like any other common man he is repenting (for the same).
2::18::22:: The king bestowed on me boons saying, 'I shall grant you two boons'. But now he wishes in vain to build a dam when the water has run down.
2::18::23::O Rama, this (truth) is the basis of righteousness. The virtuous also know this. The king being angry (with me), should not abandon the truth for your sake.
2::18::24::If you fulfil whatever the king says, pleasant or unpleasant, I shall relate to you everything.
2::18::25:: If you do not transgress the word given by the king I shall tell you everything. The king on his own will not tell you.
2::18::26:: Very much depressed on hearing the words of Kaikeyi, Rama thus said to her in the presence of the king:
2::18::27::Alas, what a pity, O queen, it does not behove you to speak to me such words. I can jump into fire. Since he is my father, preceptor and wellwisher, I shall consume deadly poison or even get drowned in the sea if he so commands.
2::18::28::Hence tell me, O Devi Whatever be the desire of the king: I promise I shall carry out, Rama does not say two things (does not go back on his word).
2::18::29::To Rama who was devoted to truth and to rectitude of conduct the ignobale Kaikeyi said: 
2::18::30:: O descendant of Raghu in the great war between gods and demons in the past your father had granted me two boons for protecting him when he was wounded by a shaft. 
2::18::31::O scion of the Raghus, hence I have asked the king for consecration of Bharata and your departure to Dandaka forest today itself.
2::18::32::O the best of men if you want to be true to the word given by you and your father, listen to what I say. 
2::18::33::Abide by your father's command. As promised by him go to the forest for fourteen years.  
2::18::34::Bharata shall be consecrated, O descendant of the Raghu dynasty with all these preparations made by the king to install you.
2::18::35::Forsake this consecration, wear matted locks and deerskin and take refuge in Dandaka forest for fourteen years.
2::18::36::Let Bharata live in Ayodhya, the capital of Kosala and rule this kingdom rich in gems of different kinds in horses, chariots and elephants.
2::18::37:: This is why the king with his face tortured by tears and (his heart) overwhelmed with compassion for you, is unable to look at you.
2::18::38::O Joy of the Raghus, O son of the Raghu race, carry out the word of promise given by the king and save him by helping him keep the truth which is great.
2::18::39:: Even though she was speaking harsh words, Rama did not come to grief. But the magnanimous king was greatly afflicted to see the calamity on his son.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टादशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eighteenth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the oly Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
