2::19::1::The destroyer of enemies (Rama) did not feel distressed to hear these words painful like death. To Kaikeyi he said:
2::19::2::Be it so I shall go from here to the forest and live there with matted hair and deerskin to keep the promise of the king.
2::19::3:: Nevertheless I would like to know why king Dasaratha, an unassailable subduer of enemies does not greet me as usual. 
2::19::4::O Devi you should not grieve. I declare in your presence that I shall go to the forest wearing tattered clothes (bark) and matted locks. Rejoice (to hear this).
2::19::5::Ordered by my father who is my wellwisher, my guru, one with a sense of gratidude and, above all a king, shall I not, without hesitation do what pleases him?
2::19::6::One thing which hurts me is that the king himself did not tell me about Bharata's  consecration. That alone is burning my heart.
2::19::7::Unurged, I would have gladly given to Bharata the kingdom, wealth, my most coveted life, and even Sita.
2::19::8::In order to keep the promise I shall do everything to fulfil your desire. Needless to say that my father has ordered this. 
2::19::9::Please console him. Why is it that the king with his eyes fixed upon the ground is shedding tears drop by drop?
2::19::10::With the king's orders let messengers go right away on swift horses to fetch Bharata from his maternal uncle's house.
2::19::11::As for me, without deliberating on the propriety of my father's orders, I shall go from here at once to Dandaka forest to live (there) for fourteen years.
2::19::12:: Kaikeyi, happy to hear the words of the son of the Raghus as she was convinced that his departure (to the forest) was certain, hastened him (to set out).
2::19::13::Let it be so. Messengers shall go at once on swift horses to bring Bharata from his maternal uncle's house. 
2::19::14:: Since you are eager (to go to the forest), I do not think it is proper to delay. O Rama therefore it behoves you to proceed immediately from here to the forest.
2::19::15::Out of shame the king is unable to speak to you. There is nothing other than this. O Rama, the best of men, dispel this distress (of mind).
2::19::16::O Rama, as long as you do not hasten to leave this city for the forest, your father will neither bathe nor eat.
2::19::17::'Fie, what a calamity' sighing thus, the king, overwhelmed with sorrow, fainted and fell back on the golden couch.
2::19::18::Rama lifted up the king and, urged by Kaikeyi, hastened to depart for the forest like a horse flogged by a whip.
2::19::19::Rama listened to the dreadful, cruel words of the ignoble woman but, without feeling any sorrow, said to Kaikeyi, these words:
2::19::20:: O Devi, I have no desire to live in this world for the sake of wealth. Know me as one with the sages who are devoted only to righteousness.
2::19::21::If I am able to do anything which pleases my venerable father, it shall be done in every possible manner, may be even at the cost of my life.
2::19::22:: There is no greater observance of righteousness than doing service to one's father or carrying out his orders.
2::19::23::Though this has not been said by my respectable father himself, I shall live in the forlorn forest for fourteen years in accordance with your word.
2::19::24::Since in my case you have exercised more authority (than my father) and pleaded with the king, it follows, you, for sure, do not see any virtue in me, O Kaikeyi (Or else, you should not have asked for Bharata's kingship).
2::19::25::After taking leave of my mother and consoling Sita, today itself I shall go to that wild  Dandaka forest.
2::19::26:: It is your bounden duty to see that Bharata rules the kingdom and serves father. 
2::19::27::Father (Dasaratha), too tormented with grief to speak cried out loudly on hearing the words of Rama.
2::19::28:: Effulgent Rama  bowed at the feet of his father who had fallen into a swoon. He bowed at the feet of the ignoble Kaikeyi and set out.
2::19::29::Hardly had Rama withdrawn from the harem after circumambulating his father and Kaikeyi when he saw his friends .
2::19::30:: Lakshmana, the enhancer of Sumitra's delight, with his eyes brimming with tears, followed him in a rage.
2::19::31::Rama circumambulated the vessels meant for the consecration ceremony and steadily glancing at them with attention slowly moved away.
2::19::32::Rama was the beloved of the people. Loss of kingdom did not diminish his splendour just like night cannot diminish the splendour of the coolrayed Moon.
2::19::33::Rama was determined to renounce the kingdom and go to the forest. So none could see any change in his mind. (For) he was one beyond all worldly affairs.
2::19::34::Selfpossessed Rama held back his sorrow within his mind, abandoned the auspicious umbrella, welldecorated fans and chariot, sent away kinsmen, citydwellers and others and entered his mother's residence to break the unpleasant news.
2::19::35::All the glorious people around him did not observe any change in the countenance of that dignified and truthful Rama.
2::19::36::The mightyarmed (Rama) did not leave his habitual cheerfulness like the autumnal Moon his own brightness.
2::19::37::Firmminded and illustrious Rama treated all people with sweet words and approached his mother. 
2::19::38::Mighty Lakshmana as virtuous as his brother held the sorrow in his mind and followed him.
2::19::39:: Rama entered  the palace which was full of great rejoicing. He did not disclose the obstruction that had come on the way of achieving his objective for fear of causing distress to his friends. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the nineteenth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
