2::47::1::प्रभातायां शर्वर्याम् when the night advanced towards dawn, ते पौराः those citizens, राघवं विना not beholding Rama, हतचेतसः deprived of  their senses, शोकोपहतचेतसः crushed with grief, निश्चेष्टाः बभूवुः were stunned.
2::47::2::शोकजाश्रुपरिद्यूनाः drenched in the tears of grief, ततस्ततः hither and thither, वीक्षमाणाः  looking, दुःखिताः anguished, रामस्य Rama's, आलोकमपि even his light (trace), न पश्यन्ति स्म could not see.
2::47::3::मनस्विनः highminded people, ते those men, धीमता by the sagacious, तेन रहिताः separated from him (Rama), विषादार्तवदनाः with faces marked with grief, कृपणाः piteous, करुणाः evoking compassion, वाचः words, वदन्ति स्म talked about. 
2::47::4::यया by which, अपहृतचेतसः senses robbed of, अद्य now, पृथूरस्कम् broadchested, महाभुजम्  mightyarmed, रामम् Rama, न पश्यामहे we cannot see, तां निद्राम् to that sleep, धिक् अस्तु fie on it. 
2::47::5::तथा in that way, अवितथक्रियः one to whom services rendered never go fruitless, महाबाहुः mightyarmed, सः राघवः that Rama, भक्तम् devoted, जनम् people, परित्यज्य abandoning, कथं नाम how, प्रवासम्   exile, गतः has gone.
2::47::6::रघूणाम् among the kings of Raghu dynasty, श्रेष्ठः the best, यः such Rama, पिता father, औरसान् पुत्रान् sons born to him, नः us, सदा always, पालयति protect, सः such Rama , नः us, त्यक्त्वा deserting, विपिनम् to the forest, कथम् how, गतः could he go? 
2::47::7::इहैव here itself, निधनम् death, यामः we will meet with, महाप्रस्थानमेव वा everlasting journey, रामेण by Rama, रहितानाम् bereft of, नः for us, जीवितम् life, किमर्थम् what is the use?
2::47::8::महान्ति huge, प्रभूतानि plenty, शुष्काणि dry, काष्ठानि सन्ति are logs here, अथ or, तैः with them, चिताम् pyre, प्रज्वाल्य flaming it, सर्वे all, पावकम् fire, प्रविशामः will enter. 
2::47::9::किम् what, वक्ष्यामः shall say, महाबाहुः mightyarmed, अनसूयः free from malice, प्रियंवदः saying pleasing words, सः such, राघवः Rama, अस्माभिः by us, नीतः conducted  to the forest, इति thus, कथम् how, वक्तुम् to tell, क्षमम् is possible?
2::47::10::राघवं विना without Rama, अस्मान् us, दृष्ट्वा having seen, सस्त्रीबालवयोधिका with women, children and the aged, सा नगरी that city, (Ayodhya), नूनम् certainly, दीना will be dejected, निरानन्दा without joy, भविष्यति will be.
2::47::11::नित्यम् always, जितात्मना by the selfcontrolled, तेन वीरेण सह with that valiant one, निर्याताः  having left (that city), तेन च with him, विहीनाः devoid of, तां पुरीम् to that city, कथम् how, पश्याम will see.
2::47::12::ते जनाः those people, दुःखार्ताः distressed men with grief, बाहुम् arms, उद्यम्य having uplifted, बहुधा in many ways, इतीव like this, वाचः words, विवत्साः deprived of calves, धेनवः इव like cows, विलपन्ति स्म lamented.
2::47::13::ततः then, क्षणम् for a short while, मार्गानुसारेण following the track, किञ्चित् for a little, गत्वा having gone, मार्गनाशात् by missing the way, पुनः again, महता great, विषादेन with grief,  समभिप्लुताः were overcome. 
2::47::14::मनस्विनः highminded people, रथस्य chariot's, मार्गनाशेन disappearance of the track, किमिदम् what is this?, दैवेन by destiny, उपहताः struck, किं करिष्यामः what are we to do?, इति  thus (saying), न्यवर्तन्त returned.
2::47::15::ततः thereafter, सर्वे all of them, क्लान्तचेतसः with their minds, यथागतेनैव they had come, मार्गेण way, व्यथितसज्जनाम् with virtuous people grieving, अयोध्याम् to Ayodhya, पुरीम् city, आगमन् had come back.
2::47::16::ते they, तां नगरीम् that city, आलोक्य having seen, क्षयव्याकुलमानसाः minds agitated, शोकपीडितैः oppressed with sorrow, नयनैः with eyes, अश्रूणि tears, आवर्तयन्त shed.
2::47::17::रामेण रहिता without Rama, एषा नगरी this city, ह्रदात् from the deep, गरुडेन by Garuda, उद्धृतपन्नगा the snakes having been lifted away, आपगा इव like a river, नातिशोभते does not look beautiful.
2::47::18::विचेतसः overcome with grief, ते they, निहतानन्दम् with their joys destroyed , नगरम् that city, चन्द्रहीनम् without Moon, आकाशम् इव like sky, तोयहीनम् without water, आर्णवम् इव like an ocean, अपश्यन् saw.
2::47::19::प्रविनष्टहर्षाः with their happiness destroyed, ते they, महाधनानि endowed with plenty of wealth, तानि such, वेश्मानि houses, दुःखेन with great difficulty, विशन्तः while entering, दुःखोपहताः stricken with sorrow, निरीक्षमाणाः looking at, स्वजनम् their own people, जनं वा or others, नैव प्रजज्ञुः could not recognise.
