2::18::1::सः रामः that Rama, शुभे on an auspicious, आसने in the couch, निषण्णम् reclined, कैकेयी सहितम् with kaikeyi, परिशुष्यता मुखेन with a pale face, दीनम् looking wretched, पितरम् father, ददर्श saw.
2::18::2::सः he, विनीतवत् with all humility, सुसमाहितः with a wellcomposed mind, पूर्वम् first, पितुः his father's, चरणौ feet, अभिवाद्य having made reverential salutation, ततः thereafter, कैकेय्याः Kaikeyi's, चरणौ feet, ववन्दे saluted.
2::18::3::नृपतिः king, राम इति saying 'Rama', वचनम् word, उक्त्वा having uttered, बाष्पपर्याकुलेक्षणः eyes full of tears, दीनः wretched, ईक्षितुम् to look at, न शशाक was not able, अभिभाषितुम् to speak, न not possible.
2::18::4::अपूर्वम् unprecedented, भयावहम् frightful, नरपतेः king's, तत् रूपम्  that appearance, दृष्ट्वा having seen, रामोऽपि Rama also, पन्नगम् serpent, पदा with foot, स्पृष्ट्वेव touched, भयम् आपन्नः experienced fear.
2::18::5::अप्रहृष्टैः without delight, इन्द्रियैः with senses, शोकसन्तापकर्शितम् emaciated with sorrow and suffering, व्यथिताकुलचेतसम् with an agitated and troubled mind, निश्श्वसन्तम् breathing heavily, ऊर्मिमालिनम् crowned with a row of waves, अक्षोभ्यम् unshakable, क्षुभ्यन्तम् shaking, सागरम् इव like a sea, उपप्लुतम् covered (eclipsed), आदित्यम् इव like the Sun, उक्तानृतम् uttering falsehood, ऋषिं यथा like an ascetic, तं महाराजम्  to that maharaja (Dasaratha).
2::18::6::अचिन्त्यकल्पम् beyond imagination, नृपतेः king's,तं शोकम् such  sorrow, उपधारयन् reflecting, पर्वणि on fullmoon day, समुद्र इव like an ocean, संरब्धतरः highly perturbed बभूव became.
2::18::7::पितृहिते रतः devoted to the wellbeing of his father, रामः Rama, चिन्तयामास reflected, अद्यैव today only, नृपतिः the king, किं स्वित् why is it, माम् me, न प्रत्यभिनन्दति not reciprocating my greeting.
2::18::8::अन्यदा in other times, पिता father, कुपितोऽपि even though angry (displeased), माम् me, दृष्ट्वा on seeing, प्रसीदति feels pleased, तस्य for him, अद्य today, माम् me, संप्रेक्ष्य having seen, किं why आयासः sorrow, प्रवर्तते caused.
2::18::9::सः रामः that Rama, दीन इव like a wretch, शोकार्तः tormented with grief, विषण्णवदनद्युतिः with a sorrowful countenance, कैकेयीम् Kaikeyi, अभिवाद्यैव having made salutations, वचनम् words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::18::10::मया by me, अज्ञानात् unknowingly, नापराद्धम् कञ्चित् have I committed any offence, येन why, पिता father, मे with me, कुपितः angry, तत् that, मम to me, आचक्ष्व tell, त्वमेव you alone, एनम् him, प्रसादय propitiate.
2::18::11::सदा always, मां प्रति to me, वत्सलः affectionate, अप्रसन्नमनाः किं नु why does he look displeased?, विवर्णवदनः of pale countenance, दीनः wretched, माम् to me, नाभिभाषते हि  does not speak?
2::18::12::शारीरः relating to the body, संतापो वाऽपि some ailment, मानसः (relating to) mind, अभितापो वा great distress, एनम् him, न बाधते कच्चित् does not trouble him, सदा always, सुखम्  happiness, दुर्लभं हि rare indeed.
2::18::13::प्रियदर्शिने with a pleasing appearance, भरते for Bharata, महासत्त्वे possessing great strength, शत्रुघ्ने with regard to Satrughna, मम my, मात्रूणां वा relating to mothers, किंचित् any, अशुभम् misfortune, न कच्चित् did not happen, (I hope)
2::18::14::महाराजम् to the maharaja (Dasaratha), अतोषयन् displeased, पितुः father's, वचः words, अकुर्वन् disobeying, नृपे कुपिते when the king has become angry, मुहूर्तमपि even for a moment, जीवितुम् to live, नेच्छेयम् do not wish.
2::18::15::नरः a man, इह in this world, आत्मनः his own, प्रादुर्भावम् coming into existence, यतो मूलम् source of his origin (birth), पश्येत् sees, प्रत्यक्षे in a visible, दैवते god, तस्मिन् in him (father), सति exists, कथम् how, न वर्तेत does not conduct.
2::18::16::मम पिता my father, ते your, अभिमानात् because of selfrespect, भवत्या by you, कोपेन out of anger, परुषम् harsh, किञ्चित् anything, कच्चित् उक्तः has said?, यत्र (येन) due to which, अस्य his, मनः mind, लुलितम् has been shaken.
2::18::17::देवि O queen, परिपृच्छत: am repeatedly asking, मे to me, एतत् this matter, तत्त्वेन truly,  आचक्ष्व tell, मनुजाधिपे in the king, अयम् this, अपूर्व: विकार: unprecedented change, किं निमित्तम् for what reason.
2::18::18::महात्मना magnanimous, राघवेण by the scion of the Raghus (Rama), एवम् thus, उक्ता spoken,  कैकेयी Kaikeyi, सुनिर्लज्जा without any sense of shame, धृष्टम् impudent, आत्महितम् in her own interest, इदं वच: these words, उवाच said.
2::18::19::राम Rama, राजा king, न कुपित: is not angry, अस्य for him, किञ्चन not even a little, व्यसनम्  misfortune, न did not befall, तु but, अस्य for him, किञ्चित् some issue, मनोगतम् in mind, त्वद्भयात् afraid of you, नाभिभाषते does not speak.
2::18::20::प्रियम् beloved, त्वाम् to you, अप्रियम् unpleasant, वक्तुम् to say, अस्य for him, वाणी goddess of speech, नोपवर्तते does not permit, अनेन by him, यत् which, मम to me, आश्रुतम् has been promised, तत् that, त्वया by you, अवश्यम् definitely, कार्यम् fit to be done.
2::18::21::स: he, एष: राजा this king, पुरा earlier, माम् me, अभिपूज्य च having honoured, (मह्यं to me)  वरम् boons, दत्त्वा having bestowed, अन्य: other, प्राकृत: common man, यथा as, तथा like that, पश्चात्तप्यते repenting.
2::18::22::स: विशांपति that king, ददानि इति saying 'I shall give you', मम to me, वरम् two boons, अतिसृज्य having bestowed, गतजले at a place where the water has drained, सेतुम् dam, निरर्थम् in vain, बन्धितुम् to construct, इच्छति wishes.
2::18::23::राम O Rama, इदम् this (truth), धर्ममूलम् is the basis of righteousness, सतामपि to the virtuous also, विदितम् is made known thus, कुपित: being angry, राजा king, तत् सत्यम् that truth, यथा as to how, त्वत्कृते on your account, न त्यजेत् may not abandon.
2::18::24::शुभं वा be it auspicious, अशुभं यदि वा or inauspicious, तत् that truth, राजा king, वक्ष्यते यदि if shall tell (you), करिष्यसि (यदा) you will fulfil, अहं पुनस्तु I again, तत: after that, सर्वम् all, आख्यास्यामि shall relate.
2::18::25::राज्ञा by the king, अभिहितम् told, तत् that, त्वयि in you, न विपत्स्यते will not go in vain, तत: then, अहम् I, अभिधास्यामि I shall speak, एष: the king, त्वयि in you, न वक्ष्यति हि will not tell.
2::18::26::कैकेय्या by Kaikeyi, समुदाहृतम् uttered, एतत् this, वचनम् word, श्रुत्वा having heard, राम:   Rama, व्यथित: depressed, नृपसन्निधौ in the presence of the king, तां देवीं to that lady, उवाच said.
2::18::27::देवी O devi, अहो alas, धिक् what a pity, माम् to me, ईदृशम् such, वच: words, वक्तुम् to speak, नार्हसे it does not behove you, हि because, अहम् I, राज्ञ: king's, वचनात् on the word, पावकेऽपि even in fire, पतेयम् will jump, नृपेण by the king, हितेन च who desires my  welfare, गुरुणा by the gurus, पित्रा by father, नियुक्त: ordered, तीक्ष्णं विषम् deadly poison, भक्षयेयम् will drink, अपि च and also, अर्णवे in the ocean, मज्जेयम् shall get drowned.
2::18::28::तत् hence, देवि O Devi राज्ञः for the king, यत् whatever, अभिकांक्षितम् is his desire, वचनम् in words, ब्रूहि tell, करिष्ये I shall carry out, प्रतिजाने च I promise, रामा Rama, द्वि two times, नाभिभाषते will not utter.
2::18::29::अनार्या ignoble, कैकेयी Kaikeyi, आर्जवसमायुक्तं devoted to rectitude of conduct, सत्यवादिनम्  truthful, तं रामम् addressing that Rama, भृशदारुणम् extremely cruel, वचनम् words, उवाच said.
2::18::30::राघव O (Rama) descendant of Raghu, पुरा in the past, दैवासुरे युद्धे in the war between gods and demons, महारणे great war, सशल्येन wounded by shafts, रक्षितेन protected (by me), ते पित्रा by your father, मम to me, वरौ two boons, दत्तौ granted.
2::18::31::राघव (Rama) scion of the Raghus, तत्र there (so), राजा the king, भरतस्य Bharata's, अभिषेचनम् consecration, अद्यैव today itself,  दण्डकारण्ये to Dandaka forest, तव your, गमनम् departure, याचितः has been asked.
2::18::32::नरश्रेष्ठ O best among men, त्वम् you, पितरम् your father, आत्मानं च yourself as well, सत्यप्रतिज्ञम् truthful to promise, कर्तुम् to make, इच्छसि यदि if you want, मम my, इदं वाक्यम् these words, शृणु listen.
2::18::33::पितु: father's, सन्निदेशे by the command, तिष्ठ abide by, तेन by him, यथा in this way, प्रतिश्रुतम् promised, त्वया by you, नव पंच च nine and five (fourteen), वर्षाणि years, अरण्यम् forest, प्रवेष्टव्यम् enter (and stay).
2::18::34::राघव O son of the Raghu dynasty (Rama), राज्ञा by the king, त्वदर्थे for your sake, यत् which, एतत् this, अभिषेचनम् installation, विहितम् has been arranged, तेन सर्वेण with all these (preparations), भरतः Bharata, अभिषिच्येत shall be consecrated.
2::18::35::इमम् अभिषेकम् this consecration, त्यक्त्वा having forsaken, जटाजिनधर: with matted hair and deerskin, दण्डकारण्यम् आश्रितः taking refuge in Dandaka forest, सप्त सप्त च वर्षाणि seven and seven (fourteen) years, वस live.
2::18::36::भरतः Bharata, कोशलपुरे in Ayodhya, the capital of Kosala country, नानारत्न समाकीर्णाम् abounding in different kinds of gems, सवाजिरथकुञ्जराम् with horses, chariots and elephants, इमां वसुधाम् this earth, प्रशास्तु let (him) rule.
2::18::37::एतेन  therefore, अयं नरेन्द्रः this king, कारुण्येन on account of compassion, समाप्लुतः was overwhelmed, शोकसंक्लिष्ट वदनः with a face fortured by tears, त्वाम् you, निरीक्षितुम् to see, न शक्नोति not able.
2::18::38::रघुनन्दन  O Joy of the Raghus, O son of the Raghu race, नरेन्द्रस्य king's, एतत् वचनम् this word of promise, कुरु carry out, राम Rama, महता सत्येन with your great truthfulness, नरेश्वरम् the king, तारयस्व save.
2::18::39::इतीव in this way, तस्याम् she (Kaikeyi), परुषम् harsh words, वदन्त्याम् was speaking, रामः Rama, शोकम् sorrow, नचैव प्रविदेश did not enter, महानुभावः dignified, राजा तु king, पुत्रव्यसनाभितप्तः afflicted with the son's calamity, प्रविव्यथे was greatly pained.
