2::73::1:: On hearing about the demise of the father and his two brothers sent in exile, Bharata  overtaken by sorrow spoke thus: 
2::73::2:: Bereft of my father and my brother who was like a father to me, of what avail is this kingdom to me when I am grieving and fallen into misfortunes? 
2::73::3:: You have caused the death of the king and reduced Rama to an ascetic. You have piled one sorrow over sorrow on me like rubbing salt to the wound
2::73::4::You have come here for the destruction of this race, like a fatal night. My father did not realize that he was embracing a live charcoal.
2::73::5::O woman of sinful thoughts, you have brought about the death of my father. O obloquy of the race, by your folly you have deprived this family of its happiness.
2::73::6::My father king Dasaratha who is bound to truth and highly renowned, having come under your influence and tormented by intense grief has departed from this world. 
2::73::7:: Why was my father the righteous maharaja killed? Why was Rama exiled into the forest? 
2::73::8:: Tormented by the grief of separation from their sons, it is difficult for Kausalya and Sumitra to survive under you, O my mother.
2::73::9::My noble and righteous brother (Rama), who is well aware of his duties to the elders conducted himself before you as he would before his own mother.
2::73::10::In the same way my eldest mother the farsighted Kausalya, too adhered to righteousness and conducted herself towards you like a sister.
2::73::11::You have forced Kausalya's son, so pure in mind, to wear garments made of bark and dwell in the forest. Do you not feel remorse for it, O perverse wretch?
2::73::12:: The glorious, valiant, selfpossessed (Rama) had never contemplated evil. What possible reason do you have for sending him, clothed in bark, into exile?
2::73::13::Being avaricious, you are, I think, unaware of my devotion to Rama. This great calamity has been brought about by you for (your greed for) the kingdom.
2::73::14:: When Rama and Lakshmana, the best of men stay away from me, by virtue of what mighty power am I competent to protect this kingdom?
2::73::15::The mighty and righteous maharaja used to rely upon the powerful Rama just as mount Meru depends on the forest surrounding it for its protection.
2::73::16:: Like a young untrained bullock that cannot carry the weight fit for a great bull, with what strength can I bear this burden?
2::73::17::If I gather the strength (to carry the burden) either by employing the four expedients (available to a king against an enemy) or by the power of intellect, I will not allow you, covetous of your son, to fulfil your ambition.
2::73::18:: Had Rama not treated you as his own mother I would not have the slightest hesitation to renounce you, a lady of sinful disposition. 
2::73::19::O woman of sinful thoughts fallen from virtuous conduct, how did you entertain this thought reproachable to our ancestors?
2::73::20::In our race only the eldest son is installed in the kingdom and the other brothers behave with utmost respect towards him. 
2::73::21::O cruel one I suppose neither have you any respect for the royal tradition nor are you aware of the everlasting benefit that ensues in following the royal traditon.
2::73::22:: According to the established law of royalty, the eldest son is invariably crowned in the kingdom. This is true of all kings. This is a special tradition of the kings of the Ikshvaku race.
2::73::23::As for the Ikshvaku kings, righteousness is their sole protection. They follow the ancestral traditions befitting the noble race. This tradition has been topsyturvied by admitting you into the family.
2::73::24::Even the kings in your ancestral family were highly distinguished men. How did this condemnable deflection originate in your mind?
2::73::25::O woman of sinful disposition, I on my part will not fulfil your cherished desire. You have started a distressing deed to bring an end to my existence.
2::73::26:: To cause a great discomfiture for you, right now I shall bring back my faultless brother, the beloved of his people, from the forest. 
2::73::27:: With the effulgent Rama brought back, I shall serve him with a  steadfast mind.
2::73::28::Having inflicted on his mother these unpleasant words in this manner, the highsouled Bharata, overwhelmed with grief, roared again like a lion in a mountaincave.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्रिसप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventythird sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
