2::17::1::Surrounded by friends overwhelmed with great joy, that glorious Rama aboard the chariot beheld the city decorated with banners and pennants and made fragrant with expensive incense and agaru and crowded with multitudes of people. 
2::17::2::That Rama, proceeded down the middle of the highway made fragrant with agaru and incense, lined with houses gleaming pale white like clouds.  
2::17::3::The highway (Rama entered) was splendid and spacious with heaps of sandal and agaru of the highest quality, excellent fragrant substances and bundles of white silken cloth. It gleamed with unholed (pristine) pearls, articles made of crystals, flowers of every kind and articles of food of every variety. 
2::17::4::Rama beheld the highway resembling the pathway of gods in heaven. Here the crossroads were always worshipped with curd, grains of rice, sacrificial libations, laja or puffed rice, fragrant substances like sandal wood, agaru and garlands of every kind.
2::17::5:: Hearing many words of blessings uttered by his friends and honouring each person   according to his rank, he passed on.   
2::17::6::(They said) Consecrated today, rule the kingdom by adopting the same path followed by your grandfathers and greatgrandfathers. 
2::17::7::Once Rama assumes kingship, we shall all live in happiness greater than when we were ruled by his father and grandfather.
2::17::8::If only we can see Rama enthroned today and going in a procession, there will be no need for food and no greater object of life to be accomplished.  
2::17::9::For us, there is nothing dearer in the kingdom than the consecration of Rama of undimmed brilliance.
2::17::10::Indifferent to such warm words by his friends in his favour Rama passed along the highway. 
2::17::11::Even though Rama, the best among men had driven past them none was able to withdraw his mind or eyes from him. (They continued).
2::17::12::'Whoever does not see Rama or Rama does not see him, will be blamed by all men in the (three) worlds. Even his self will blame him.
2::17::13::That righteous Rama shows compassion to all, to the four castes, to the young and the old. So they were devoted to him. 
2::17::14:: The son of the king proceeded, leaving on his right, squares (intersections of four roads), and roads leading to temples, monuments and shrines too.
2::17::15::That prince (Rama) arrived at the excellent palace of the king, which looked like the abode of Indra on earth, blazing with splendour. The various towers of the palace touching the sky resembled clusters of white clouds, like auspicious peaks of Kailasa, and like white aerial chariots decorated with gems. 
2::17::16:: Rama, the best among men, crossed the first three courtyards which were protected by bowmen on horses and crossed the remaining two on foot.
2::17::17:: Crossing the courtyards on his way Rama sent back his followers and entered the private apartment of the king.      
2::17::18::When the prince approached his father all the people were delighted and  awaited his return like the ocean waiting for the rise of the Moon.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तदशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventeenth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
