2::28::1::धर्मज्ञः knower of righteousness, धर्मवत्सलः devoted to righteousness, सः he, एवम् thus, ब्रुवतीम् speaking, सीताम् to Sita, नेतुम् to take, बुद्धिम् decision, वने in the forest, दुःखानि difficulties, चिन्तयन् while reflecting so, न कुरुते did not make.
2::28::2::धर्मात्मा righteous, बाष्पदूषितलोचनाम् whose eyes were blurred with tears, ताम् her, सान्त्वयित्वा having consoled, निवर्तनार्थे to dissuade, पुनः again, एतत् this, वाक्यम् word, उवाच ह said. 
2::28::3::सीते O Sita, महाकुलीना born in a noble race, सदा always, धर्मे to duty ,निरता असि you are devoted, इह here, यथा as, मे मनसः to my mind, सुखम् brings happiness, त्वम् you, स्वधर्मम् your duty, आचर practise.
2::28::4::अबले O frail one, सीते O Sita, त्वाम् you, यथा as, वक्ष्यामि I shall tell you, तथा like that, त्वया by you, कार्यम् should be done, वने in the forest, बहवः many, दोषाः हि hardships are there indeed, वदतः being told, मे by me, तान् about them, निबोध pray attention.
2::28::5::सीते O Sita, वनवासकृता to live in the forest, एषा this, मति: mind, विमुच्यताम् give up, कान्तारम् a dreary forest, वनम् forest, बहुदोषं (बहुदोषयुतं) has many hardships, अभिधीयते हि is being said.
2::28::6::मया by me, एतत् वचः these words, हितबुद्ध्या with prudence, अभिधीयते हि is being said, वनम् forest, सदा always, सुखम् as happy, न जानामि I do not know, सदा always, दुःखमेव grief only.
2::28::7::गिरिनिर्झरसम्भूताः arising from the falling waters from mountains, निनदाः sounds, गिरिकन्दर वासिनाम् living in the mountain caves, सिंहानाम् of lions, श्रोतुम् to hear, दुःखाः fearful, अतः therefore, वनम् forest, दुःखम् source of  pain, दुःखमतो painful.
2::28::8::विस्रब्धाः fearless, मत्ताः wild, शून्ये in a deserted place, क्रीडमानाः while sporting, महामृगाः great animals, दृष्ट्वा on seeing, समभिवर्तन्ते attack, सीते Sita, अतः therefore, वनम् forest, दुःखम् is a source of danger.
2::28::9::सग्राहाः with crocodiles, पङ्कवत्यः च filled with mud, सरितश्चैव rivers also, मत्तै: intoxicated, गजैरपि by elephants also, दुस्तराः difficult to cross, अतः therefore, वनम् the forest, नित्यम् always, दुःखतरम् more dangerous.
2::28::10::मार्गाः the paths, लताकण्टकसङ्कीर्णाः full of thorny creepers, कृकवाकूपनादिताः echoing with the noise of wild fowls, निरपाः with no water, सुदुर्गाः च are  extremely difficult to traverse, अतः therefore, वनम् forest, दुःखम् is a difficult place.
2::28::11::स्वयम् on their own, भग्नासु broken (fallen), पर्णशय्यासु bed of leaves, भूतले on the ground, श्रमखिन्नेन exhausted with struggles, रात्रिषु at night, सुप्यते will have to sleep, तस्मात्  therefore, वनम् forest life, दुःखतरम् is extremely painful.
2::28::12::सीते O Sita, अहोरात्रम् night and day, नियतात्मना with senses under control, वृक्षावपतितैः fallen down the trees, फलैः with fruits, सन्तोषः satisfaction, कर्तव्यः to be derived, अतः therefore, वनम् forest life, दुःखम् is full of suffering.
2::28::13::मैथिलि O Daughter of Mithila, यथाप्राणेन according to one's ability, उपवासश्च fasting also, कर्तव्यः has to be undertaken, वल्कलाम्बरधारिणा wearing robes of bark, जटाभारश्च also burden of matted hair, कर्तव्यः has to be borne.
2::28::14::देवतानाम् of devatas, पित्रूणां च also of ancestors, प्राप्तानाम् of those arrived, अतिथीनां च of guests also, विधिपूर्वकम् duly, नित्यशः always, प्रतिपूजनम् worship, कर्तव्यम् needs to be done.
2::28::15::नियमेनैव as per rule, चरता while wandering (like an ascetic), नित्यशः always, काले काले at prescribed hours, त्रिः three times, अभिषेकः bathing, कार्यः will have to be done, तस्मात् therefore, वनम् life in the forest, दुःखतरम् is extremely difficult.
2::28::16::बाले O innocent one, स्वयम् on your own, आहृतैः has been brought, कुसुमैः with flowers, आर्षेण विधिना as per the injunction of the Vedas, वेद्याम् on the altar, उपहारश्च offering, कर्तव्यः needs to be made, अतः therefore, वनम् living in the forest, दुःखम् is difficult.
2::28::17::मैथिलि O daughter of Mithila, वनचरैः by wanderers in the forest, यताहारैः with limited food, यथालब्धेन  whatever is available, तेन with that alone, सन्तोषः satisfaction, कर्तव्यः should be derived, अतः for that reason, वनम् forest life, दुःखम् is difficult.
2::28::18::अत्र there (in the forest), वाताः wind, तिमिरम् darkness, अतीव is extreme, नित्यशः always, बुभुक्षा hunger, महान्ति great, भयानि च fears also, ततः therefore, वनम् forest life, दुःखतरम् is extremely difficult.
2::28::19::भामिनि O Beautiful lady, बहुरूपाः च of various forms too, बहवः many, सरीसृपाः च reptiles also, दर्पात् fiercely, पृथिवीम् on the ground, चरन्ति move about, ततः therefore, वनम् to live in the forest, दुःखतरं is extremely dangerous.
2::28::20::नदी निलयनाः live in rivers, नदीकुटिलगामिनः meandering like rivers, सर्पाः serpents, पन्थानम् the path, आवृत्य having obstructed, तिष्ठन्ति stay, ततः therefore, वनम् life in the forest, दुःखतरम् is full of sufferings.
2::28::21::पतङ्गा: birds, वृश्चिकाः scorpions, कीटाः insects, मशकैः सह with mosquitoes, दंशाश्च gnats, नित्यम् always, सर्वम् everyone, बाधन्ते trouble,  अतः therefore, वनम् the life in forest, दुःखम् is a source of suffering.
2::28::22::भामिनि O lovely Sita, वने in the forest, द्रुमाः trees, कुशा काशाः च kusa grass and reeds,  कण्टकिनश्चैव thorny ones, व्याकुलशाखाग्राः with tops of branches interlaced with each other, तेन therefore, वनम् forest life, दुःखतरम् is full of difficulties.
2::28::23::अरण्यवासे living in the forest, वसतः while living, बहवः many, कायक्लेशाः physical afflictions, विविधानि various, भयानि च fears, ततः therefore, वनम् forest, दुःखमेव is full of difficulties only.
2::28::24::क्रोधलोभौ anger and greed, विमोक्तव्यौ should be given up, तपसे in asceticism, मतिः mind, कर्तव्या must be fixed, भेतव्ये even in alarming situations, न भेतव्यम् one should not be afraid, अतः therefore, वनम् life in the forest, नित्यम् always, दुःखम् full of misery.
2::28::25::तत् for that reason, ते to you, वनम् to the forest, गत्वा going, अलम् is not desirable, तव for you, वनम् forest life, क्षमम् न हि is not fit, इह now, विमृशन् while reconsidering, वनम् forest life, बहुदोषतरम् is full of great dangers, पश्यामि I see.
2::28::26::महात्मना by the great, रामेण by Rama, यदा when, वनम् to the forest, नेतुम् to take, मतिः mind (decision), कृता has been made, न बभूव did not happen, तदा then, सीता Sita, तस्य his, तत्  that, वचनं words, न चकार did not follow, ततः threafter, सुदुःखिता deeply grieved, रामम् to Rama, इदम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
