2::20::1::तदा then, पुरुषव्याघ्रे tiger among men, तस्मिन् that Rama, कृताज्ञलौ with folded palms, निष्क्रामति while (he was) leaving, अन्तःपुरे in the inner apartment, स्त्रीणाम् women's, महान् great, आर्तशब्दः cries of distress, जज्ञे arose.
2::20::2::यः who (Rama), पित्रा by father, कृत्येषु in his duty, अचोदितः without being urged, सर्वस्य entire, अन्तः पुरस्य for the inner apartment, गतिः refuge, शरणं च (आसीत्) was protector, सः रामः that Rama, अद्य now, प्रवत्स्यति is now going on exile.
2::20::3::जन्मप्रभृति right from birth, राघवः Rama, जनन्याम् with regard to his mother, कौशल्यायाम् in Kausalya, सदा always, युक्तः devoted, यथा how, वर्तते is conducting himself, अस्मासु in all of us, तथैव in the same way, वर्तते is conducting.
2::20::4::क्रोधनीयानि deeds that cause anger, वर्जयन् avoiding, क्रुद्धान् सर्वान् all cholerictempered persons, प्रसादयन् pacifying them, अभिशप्तोऽपि even cursed, न क्रुध्यति does not get angry, सः such Rama, अद्य today, इतः from here, प्रवत्स्यति is going on exile.
2::20::5::बत alas यः who (Dasaratha), सर्वभूतानाम् of all beings, गतिम् who is the refuge, राघवम् to the son of the Raghus (Rama), परित्यजति is abandoning, अयम् this, नः राजा our king, अबुद्धि: devoid of intellect, जीवलोकम् in the world of living beings, चरति moving.
2::20::6::इति thus, सर्वाः all, ताः महिष्यः the king's wives, विवत्साः calfless, धेनवः इव like cows, सस्वरम् loudly, चुक्रुशुः च अपि cried and also, पतिम् husband, अचुक्रुशुश्च एव blamed also.
2::20::7::सः महीपतिः that lord of the earth (king), अन्तःपुरे in the harem, घोरम् painful, आर्तशब्दम् cries of distress, श्रुत्वा having heard, पुत्र शोकाभिसन्तप्तः tormented with grief on account of his son, आसने in his seat, व्यालीयत sank down.
2::20::8::वशी having selfcontrol, रामस्तु Rama however, भृशम् highly, आयस्तः troubled, कुञ्जरः इव like an elephant, निःश्वसन् heaving sighs, भ्रात्रा brother, सहितः together with, मातुः mother's, अन्तःपुरम् towards inner apartment, जगाम went.
2::20::9::सः he, तत्र there, गृहद्वारि at the entrance of the residence, उपविष्टम् seated, परमपूजितम् highly venerable, वृद्धं पुरुषम् aged man, तिष्ठतः standing, बहून् many, अपरांश्च others, अपश्यत् beheld.
2::20::10::तदा then, रामम् Rama, दृष्ट्वैव on seeing, ते सर्वे all of them, सहसा immediately, उत्थिताः stood up, जयताम् among victors, श्रेष्ठम् best, राघवम् to the scion of the Raghu dynasty (Rama), जयेन with victory, वर्धयन्ति स्म caused prosperity.
2::20::11::सः he (Rama), प्रथमां कक्ष्याम् first courtyard, प्रविश्य having entered, द्वितीयायाम् in the second courtyard, वेदसम्पन्नान् learned in the Vedas, राज्ञा by the king, अभिसत्कृतान् wellhonoured, वृद्धान् aged, ब्राह्मणान् brahmins, ददर्श saw.
2::20::12::सः राम that Rama, तान् विप्रान् those brahmins, प्रणम्य having paid obeisance, तृतीयायाम् in the third courtyard, द्वाररक्षणतत्पराः vigilantly guarding the door, स्त्रियः women, वृद्धा: the old, तथा as also, बालाः young children, ददर्श saw.
2::20::13::तदा then, ताः those, स्त्रियः women, प्रहृष्टाः were very pleased, वर्धयित्वा greeting him with   words wishing prosperity, त्वरिताः in great haste, गृहम् in the apartment, प्रविश्य having entered, राममातुः Rama's mother, (Kausalya), प्रियम् pleasant (tidings), न्यवेदयन्त informed.
2::20::14::तदा then, कौशल्या Kausalya, रात्रिम् night, समाहिता with composed mind, स्थित्वा remaining (in meditation), प्रभाते in the early morning, पुत्रहितैषिणी to secure her son's welfare, विष्णोः Visnu's, पूजाम् worship, अकरोत् performed.
2::20::15::नित्यम् always, व्रतपरायणा devoted to performing vows, सा she, क्षौमवसना clad in silk cloth, हृष्टा in delight, कृतमङ्गला having performed the rituals of auspiciousness, मन्त्रवत् in accordance with mantras, अग्निं fire, जुहोति स्म offered oblations.
2::20::16::तदा then, रामः Rama, शुभम् auspicious, मातु: अन्तःपुरम् inner apartment of his mother, प्रविश्य having entered, तत्र there, हुताशनम् to Agni, हावयन्तीम् exhorting the priests to offer sacrificial oblations, मातरम् to mother, ददर्श saw.
2::20::17::रघुनन्दनः scion of the Raghus or delight of the Raghu race (Rama), तत्र there, देवकार्यनिमित्तम् on account of religious acts, समुद्यतम् (things) kept ready, अपश्यत् saw, दध्यक्षतम् curd, grains of rice (smeared with turmeric), घृतं चैव also clarified butter, मोदकान् sweetmeats, तथा as also, हविषः oblations, लाजान् parched grain, शुक्लानि white, माल्यानि garlands of flowers, पायसम् porridge, कृसरम् sesame seeds mixed with cooked rice, समिधः sacrirficial faggots, पूर्णकुम्भान् vessels filled with water, ददर्श saw.
2::20::18::शुक्लक्षौमसंवीताम् wearing white silk, व्रतयोगेन due to observance of vows, कर्शिताम् emaciated, देववर्णिनीम् having divine complexion, अद्भिः with water, देवताम् to deities, तर्पयन्तीम् engaged in propitiating, ताम् her (Kausalya), ददर्श beheld.
2::20::19::सा she, चिरस्य after a long time, आगतम् arrived, मातृनन्दनम् delight to mother, आत्मजम् her son, दृष्ट्वा having seen, संहृष्टा in great delight, बडबा mare, किशोरं यथा like its offspring, अभिचक्राम went towards him.
2::20::20::सः राघवः that scion of the Raghus (Rama), अभिक्रान्ताम् who had come to him, मातरम् mother, उपसंगृह्य with respectful salutations, बाहुभ्याम् with both arms, परिष्वक्तः was embraced, मूर्धनि on his forehead, उपाघ्रातश्च was kissed.
2::20::21::कौशल्या Kausalya, दुराधर्षम् invincible, आत्मनः her own, सुतम् son, तं राघवम् that Rama, पुत्रवात्सल्यात् out of filial affection, प्रियहितम् pleasant and beneficial, इदम् these, वचः words, उवाच spoke.
2::20::22::वृद्धानाम् of the aged, धर्मशीलानाम् of the virtuous, महात्मनाम् great, राजर्षीणाम् of the rajarsis, आयुश्च long life, कीर्तिं च fame, कुले in the race, उपहितम् maintained over a long time, धर्मं च righteousness, प्राप्नु हि you may attain.
2::20::23::राघव scion of the Raghu dynasty (Rama), सत्यप्रतिज्ञम् true to his promise, पितरम् your father, राजानम् king, पश्य see, धर्मात्मा righteous one, त्वाम् you, अद्यैव today, यौवराज्ये as heirapparent, अभिषेक्ष्यति will coronate you. 
2::20::24::भोजनेन with food, निमन्त्रितः a man invited, राघवः Rama, दत्तम् provided, आसनम् seat, आलभ्य having touched, व्रोडात् out of shame, किञ्चित् a little, अञ्जलिम् with folded hands, प्रसार्य having stretched, मातरम् to mother, अब्रवीत् said.
2::20::25::स्वभावविनीतश्च by nature modest, तदा then, गौरवात् out of reverence (for his mother), नतः च humble also, सः he, दण्डकारण्यम् to Dandaka forest, प्रस्थितः for his departure, अप्रष्टुम् to seek her permission, उपचक्रमे commenced.
2::20::26::देवि O Devi, नूनम् certainly, उपस्थितम् has befallen, महत् great, भयम् misfortune, न जानीषे you do not know, इदम् this one, तव च to you, वैदेह्याः of Sita, लक्ष्मणस्य च of Lakshmana also, दुःखाय for distress.
2::20::27::दण्डकारण्यम् to Dandaka forest, गमिष्ये setting forth, मे for me, अनेन आसनेन with this seat, किम् what is the purpose, विष्टरासनयोग्यः worthy of a mat made of kusa grass, अयम् this, कालः time, मम for me, उपस्थितः has come.
2::20::28::अमिषम् all meat, हित्वा abstaining, मुनिवत् like a hermit, मधुमूलफलैः honey, fruits and roots, जीवन् while living on, चतुर्दश fourteen, वर्षाणि years, विजने in a solitary, वने in the forest, वत्स्यामि am to dwell.
2::20::29::महाराजः great king, भरताय to Bharata, यौवराज्यम् status of heirapparent, प्रयच्छति is conferring, मां पुनः for me again, तापसम् like an ascetic, दण्डकारण्ये in Dandaka forest, विवासयति  sending in exile.
2::20::30::सः that (I am), वन्यानि forest products, आसेवमानः eating, फलमूलैः fruits and roots, वर्तयन् while living, षट्चाष्टौ च six and eight (fourteen), वर्षाणि years, विजने वने in the desolate forest, वत्स्यामि shall dwell.
2::20::31::सा देवी that Kausalya, परशुना with an axe, वने in the forest, निकृत्ता severed, सालस्य sal tree's, यष्टिः इव like a stick (branch), दिवः from heaven, च्युता fallen down, देवतेव like a celestial, सहसा suddenly, पपात fell down.
2::20::32::अदुःखोचिताम् who does not deserve sorrow, पतिताम् fallen on the ground, कदलीमिव like a plantain tree, गतचेतसम् deprived of her senses, तां मातरम् to that mother, दृष्ट्वा having seen, रामः Rama, उत्थापयामास lifted her up.
2::20::33::उपावृत्त्य rolled on the ground, उत्थिताम् arisen, वाहिताम् for drawing (heavy burden), बडबामिव like a mare, दीनाम् miserable, पांसुकुण्ठितसर्वाङ्गीम् all her body covered with dust, पाणिना  with the hand, विममर्श caressed (wiped away).
2::20::34::असुखार्ता struck by lack of happiness, सुखोचिता deserving happiness, सा she Kausalya, लक्ष्मणे in Lakshmana, उपशृण्वति while listening, उपासीनम् sitting nearby, पुरुषव्याघ्रम् to the tiger (the best) among men, राघवम् to Rama, उवाच said.
2::20::35::पुत्र O my son, राघव Rama, मम to me, शोकाय to cause sorrow, न जायेथाः यदि if you were not born, अहम् I, अप्रजाः without progeny, अतः more than this, भूयः greater, दुःखम् sorrow, न स्म पश्येयम् would not have seen.
2::20::36::पुत्र O my son, वन्ध्यायाः for a barren woman, अप्रजाः issueless, अस्मि I am, इति thus, मानसः in mind, एकः one, शोकः affliction, भवति हि surely happens, अन्यः any other, सन्तापः sorrow, न विद्यते हि does not exist.
2::20::37::राम O Rama, पतिपौरुषे when my husband was exercising authority, कल्याणम् auspicious moment, सुखं वा or pleasure, न दृष्टपूर्वम् was not seen earlier, पुत्रेऽपि in son, पश्येयम् can I see, इति thus, मया by me, आस्थितम् life is sustained.
2::20::38::सा अहम् such am I वरा सती being the eldest (of the queens), अवराणाम् by the younger ones, हृदयच्छिदाम् heartbreaking, सपत्नीनाम् cowives, अमनोज्ञानि unpleasant, बहूनि many, वाक्यानि words, श्रोष्ये will have to listen.
2::20::39::मम to me, अनन्तकः unending, यादृश: शोकः such sorrow, विलापश्च lamentation, अतः now, प्रमदानाम् for women, दुःखतरम् more distress, किं नु भविष्यति  what else can be there?
2::20::40::तात O child, त्वयि you, सन्निहितेऽपि even when you are nearby, अहम् I, एवम् in this way, निराकृता आसम् I am rejected, प्रोषिते when you are banished, किं पुनः what to say again, मे  for me, मरणम् death, ध्रुवम् is certain.
2::20::41::कैकेय्याः of Kaikeyi's, परिवारेण attendants, समा वा equal to, अथवा or, अवरा inferior, अतन्त्रिता  without independence, नित्यम् always, भर्तुः by husband, अत्यन्तनिगृहीता अस्मि am greatly repressed.
2::20::42::यः whoever, कश्चित् any one, माम् me, सेवते serving, अथवा or, अनुवर्तते following me, सः जनः such person, कैकेय्याः Kaikeyi's, पुत्रम् son, अन्वीक्ष्य having seen, नाभिभाषते हि will not talk to me.
2::20::43::पुत्र O son, दुर्गता fallen into a bad state, नित्यक्रोधतया due to being always in temper, खरवादि speaking harsh words, तस्याः कैकेय्याः that Kaikeyi's, तत्वदनम् that face, द्रष्टुम् to look at, कथं नु how, शक्ष्यामि will be able?
2::20::44::राघव Rama, तव जातस्य after you were (re) born (after your investiture with the sacred thread regarded as second birth), दश सप्त च ten and seven (seventeen), वर्षाणि years, दुःखपरिक्षयम् end of my sorrows, प्रकाङ्क्षन्त्या longing, मया by me, अतितानि have been spent.
2::20::45::राघव Rama, तत् for that reason, एवम् like this, जीर्णापि grown old, अक्षयम् unending, महत् great, दुःखम् sorrow, सपत्नीनाम् of my cowives, विप्रकारम् insult, चिरम् for long time, सहितुम् to tolerate, नोत्सहे do not desire.
2::20::46::कृपणा wretched I am, तव your, परिपूर्णशशिप्रभम् as bright as the full Moon, मुखम् face, अपश्यन्ती without beholding, कृपणजीविकाम् pitiable means of existence, कथम् how, वर्तयिष्यामि will live.
2::20::47::त्वम् you, दुर्गतया मया by me so unfortunate, उपवासैश्च through fasts, योगैश्च through meditation, बहुभिः many, परिश्रमैश्च with efforts, दुःखम् with difficulty, मोघम् in vain, संवर्धितः have been brought up.
2::20::48::प्रावृषि in rainy season, नवाम्भसा with fresh water, स्पृष्टम् contacted, महानद्याः mighty river's, कूलम् इव like bank, मम my, इदम् this, हृदयम् heart, यत् for which reason, न दीर्यते does not break, स्थिरम् firm (hard), मन्ये am thinking.
2::20::49::सिंहः lion, रुदतीम् crying, मृगीमिव like a female deer, माम् myself, अन्तकः Yama, (the god of death), प्रसह्य forcibly, अद्यैव now itself, यत् since, न जिहीर्षति is not willing to carry, मम to me, नूनम् certainly, मरणम् death, न विद्यते does not befall, मम for me, यमक्षये in the abode of (the god of death), Yama, अवकाशः opportunity, नास्ति not there.
2::20::50::नूनम् assuredly, मम my, स्थिरम् still (hard), हृदयम् heart, आयसम् is made of iron, यत् since, न भिद्यते is not breaking, भुवि on this earth, नावदीर्यते does not disintegrate, अनेन this, दुःखेन due to sorrow, देहम् body, अर्पितम् surrendered (pervaded), अकाले untimely, मरणम् death, न विद्यते may not be possible, ध्रुवम् this is certain.
2::20::51::मे my, व्रतानि mortifications, दानानि च charitable gifts, संयमाश्च selfrestraint, अनर्थकानीति यत् are all meaningless, इदम् this, दुःखम् regret, अपत्यकारणात् for the sake of progeny, तप्तम् practised, यत् which, तपः asceticism, ऊषरे in a barren land, उप्तम् sown, बीजम् इव like a seed, सुनिष्फलम् was fruitless.
2::20::52::कश्चित् any one, गुरुदुःखकर्शितः tormented with deep grief, स्वया of one's own, इच्छया by free will, अकाले untimely, मरणम् death, लभेत यदि if he gets, अहम् I, अद्यैव now itself, आत्मजेन विना without offspring, धेनुरिव like a cow, त्वया विना without you, परेतसंसदम् to the assembly of Yama, गता would have reached.
2::20::53::अथापि even then, चन्द्रनिभाननप्रभ one having a countenance resembling the splendour of the full Moon, त्वया विना without you, मे my, जीवितम् life, अद्य today, किम् what use, वृथा fruitless, सुदुर्बला  enfeebled, गौः cow, वत्सम् इव like a calf, अनुकाङ्क्षया in its affection, त्वयैव with you alone, अद्य now, वनम् to the forest, अनुव्रजिष्यामि shall follow. 
2::20::54::सा that (Kausalya), राघवम् Rama, समीक्ष्य having seen, महत् great, व्यसनम् misfortune, उपनिशम्य having heard, बद्धम् is made captive, सुतम् son, अवेक्ष्य looking on, किन्नरीव like a kinnari, तदा then, असुखम् unhappy, अमर्षिता wrathful, भृशम् extremely, बहु much, विललाप lamented.
