2::59::1::राजा king, इति thus, ब्रुवन्तम् while speaking, सूतम् charioteer, मन्त्रिसत्तमम् best of  ministers, तं सुमन्त्रम् that Sumantra, शेषम् the rest, पुनः again, ब्रूहि tell, इति thus, वचनम् words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::59::2::सुमन्त्रः Sumantra, तस्य his, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा having heard, बाष्पविक्लबः overcome with tears, रामसन्देशविस्तरम् details of Rama's message, भूयोऽपि once again, कथयामास narrated.
2::59::3::महाराज O king, चीरवल्कलधारिणौ wearing the bark robes, तौ वीरौ those heroes, जटाः matted hair, कृत्वा having made, गङ्गाम् the river Ganga, उत्तीर्य having crossed, प्रयागाभिमुखौ towards Prayaga, गतौ went.
2::59::4::लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, रघुनन्दनम् Rama, पालयन् protecting, अग्रतः ahead of him, यातः had gone, तथा that way, गच्छतः going, तान् him, दृष्ट्वा having seen, तदा then, अवशः helplessly, निवृत्तः अस्मि returned.
2::59::5::रामे Rama, वनम् for the forest, सम्प्रस्थिते when setting out, निवृत्तस्य when I returned, मम my, अश्वा: तु as for horses, उष्णम् hot, अश्रुप्रमुञ्चन्तः shedding tears, वर्त्मनि on the path, न प्रावर्तन्त did not proceed.
2::59::6::अथ thereafter, अहम् I, उभाभ्याम् to both, राजपुत्राभ्याम् princess, अञ्जलिम् folded palms, कृत्वा having made, तत् that, दुःखम् अपि grief, धारयन् controlling, रथम् chariot, आस्थाय ascending, प्रस्थितः set out.
2::59::7::रामः Rama, पुनः again, माम् me, शब्दापयेत् यदि if calls me, इति thus, आशया with hope, तत्रैव there itself, गुहेन सार्धम् with Guha, बहून् many (three), दिवसान् अस्मि I waited.
2::59::8::महाराज O great king, ते विषये throughout your empire, वृक्षाः अपि even trees, सपुष्पाङ्कुरकोरकाः with flowers, buds and shoots, रामव्यसनकर्शिताः oppressed on account of the calamity on Rama, परिम्लानाः withered.
2::59::9::नद्यः rivers, उपतप्तोदकाः with heated waters, पल्वलानि ponds, सरांसि च lakes, वनानि forests, उपवनानि च gardens, परिशुष्कपलाशानि have their foliage shrivelled.
2::59::10::सत्त्वानि living beings, न च सर्पन्ति are not moving, व्यालाः च wild animals also, नप्रचरन्ति not ranging, तत् वनम् that forest, रामशोकाभिभूतम् overpowered by grief on account of Rama, निष्कूजम् silent, अभवत् became.
2::59::11::नरेन्द्र O king, पद्मिन्यः lotus lakes, लीनपुष्करपत्राः च with the shrivelled blue lotus leaves submerged in water, कलुषोदकाः with waters turbid, सन्तप्तपद्माः withered lotuses, लीनमीनविहङ्गमाः devoid of fishes and birds.
2::59::12::जलजानि born in water, पुष्पाणि flowers, स्थलजानि born on the land, माल्यानि garlands of flowers, फलानि च fruits, अद्य now, अल्पगन्धीनि with scant fragrance, यथापुरम् as before, न भान्ति do not shine.
2::59::13::अत्र there, उद्यानानि gardens, शून्यानि are deserted, प्रलीनविहगानि च with birds vanished (into the depth of woods), मनुजर्षभ O (best) among men, आरामान् parks, अभिरामन् as beautiful, न पश्यामि I do not see.
2::59::14::अयोध्यायाम् Ayodhya, प्रविशन्तम् entering, कश्चित् any one, न अभिनन्दति is not greeting, नराः people, रामम् Rama, अपश्यन्तः without beholding, मुहुर्मुहुः again and again, निश्श्वसन्ति are heaving sighs.
2::59::15::देव O lord, विना रामम् without Rama, इह here, आगतम् arrived, राजरथम् royal chariot, दृष्ट्वा having seen, राजमार्गगतः thronged the highway, सर्वः all, जनः people, दुःखात् due to agony, अश्रुमुखः with tears on their faces. 
2::59::16::नार्य: women, हर्म्यै: from mansions, विमानैः from sevenstoried buildings, प्रासादैः from royal palaces, आगतम् arrived, रथम् chariot, अवेक्ष्य having seen, रामादर्शनकर्शिताः afflicted by the absence of Rama, हाहाकारकृताः cried 'Alas, Alas'. 
2::59::17::स्त्रियः women, आर्ततराः in deep anguish, आयतैः with large, विमलैः bright, अश्रुवेगपरिप्लुतैः flooded with gushing tears, नेत्रै: with their eyes, अव्यक्तम् silently, अन्योन्यम् one another, अभिवीक्षन्ते are looking at.
2::59::18::अहम् I, आर्ततया in great agony, अमित्राणाम् among those who are not friends, किञ्चित् even a little, विशेषम् diference, न उपलक्षये could not see, मित्राणाम् among friends, उदासीनजनस्य of people indifferent, न could not see.
2::59::19::महाराज O great king, अप्रहृष्टमनुष्या च people cheerless, दीननागतुरङ्गमा spiritless elephants and horses, आर्तस्वरपरिम्लाना with agonised voices and pale faces, विनिश्वसित निस्स्वना with deep sighs, निरानन्दा depressed, रामप्रव्राजनातुरा distressed due to Rama's exile, पुत्रहीना deprived of her son, कौसल्या इव like Kausalya, मा प्रतिभाति appears to me.
2::59::20::राजा king, सूतस्य charioteer's, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा having heard, परमदीनया deeply dejected, बाष्पोपहतया choked with tears, वाचा with a voice, तं सूतम् to the charioteer, इदम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::59::21::पापाभिजनभावया by one who has wicked relations and sinful intention, कैकेय्या by Kaikeyi, विनियुक्तेन having been incited, मया by me, मन्त्रकुशलैः with men skilled in giving advice, वृद्धै: सह with seniors, न समर्थितम् was not consulted.
2::59::22::सुहृद्भि: with friends, अमात्यैः with ministers, नैगमैः च with men of prudence, न मन्त्रयित्वा without consulting, मया by me, अयम् this, अर्थः act, स्त्रीहेतो: for the sake of a woman, सहसा in great haste, कृतः committed.
2::59::23::सूत O charioteer, वा otherwise, इदम् this, महत् great, व्यसनम् calamity, भवितव्यतया because it was destined to happen this way, अस्य this, कुलस्य race's, विनाशाय for destruction, यदृच्छया wilfully, प्राप्तम् has befallen, नूनम् surely.
2::59::24::सूत O Charioteer, मया by me, ते to you, किंचित् even a little, सुकृतम् favour, कृतम् अस्ति यदि  if it has been rendered, त्वम् you, आशु quickly, माम् me, रामम् to Rama, प्रापय take, प्राणाः life, माम् me, संत्वरयन्ति are hastening me up.
2::59::25::अद्यापि even now, मम my, आज्ञैव by command, राघवम् Rama, निवर्तयतु be brought back, रामं विना without Rama, मुहूर्तमपि even for a moment, जीवितुम् to live, न शक्ष्यामि am not able.
2::59::26::अथवा or otherwise also, महाबाहुः mightyarmed, दूरम् far away, गतः भविष्यति must have gone, मामेव me alone, रथम् on the chariot, आरोप्य placing, शीघ्रम् quickly, रामाय to Rama, दर्शय show.
2::59::27::वृत्तदंष्ट्रः one with wellshaped teeth, महेष्वासः a great archer, असौ that, लक्ष्मणपूर्वजः elder brother of Lakshmana, Rama, क्व where is he?, एनम् him, सीतया सह along with Sita, साधु well, पश्येयं यदि if I can see him, जीवामि I can live.
2::59::28::लोहिताक्षम् one with redcoloured eyes, महाबाहुम् mightyarmed, आमुक्तमणिकुण्डलम् wearing earrings bedecked with gems, रामम् Rama, न पश्येयं यदि if I cannot see him, यमक्षयम् kingdom of Yama, lord of death, गमिष्यामि I will go.
2::59::29::इमाम् this, अवस्थाम् condition, आपन्नः having reached, सः अहम् such me, इक्ष्वाकुकुलनन्दनम्  Delight of the Ikshvakus, राघवम् Rama, इह now, न पश्यामि see not, अतः than this, दुःखतरम् greater sorrow,  किं नु what more.
2::59::30::हा राम Ah Rama, हा रामानुज Ah Lakshmana, तपस्विनि the unfortunate, हा वैदेहि Ah Vaidehi,  माम् me, दुःखेन due to grief, अनाथवत् like an orphan, म्रियमाणम् dying, न जानीत you do not know.
2::59::31::तेन दुःखेन by that sorrow, भृशम् extremely, अर्पित चेतनः with enfeebled mind,  सः राजा that king, सुदुष्पारम् difficult to cross, शोकसागरम् sea of sorrow, अवगाढः immersed, अब्रवीत् said. 
2::59::32::देवि O queen, कौशल्ये Kausalya, अहम् I, यस्मिन् in which, निमग्नः immersed, (असौ this, शोकसागरः ocean of sorrow), रामशोकमहाभोगः sorrow due to Rama's separation as its breadth, सीताविरहपारगः Sita's separation as its other shore, श्वसितोर्मिमहावर्तः sighs as its turbulent waves and whirlpools, बाष्पफेनजलाविलः tears as its foam and turbid waters, बाहुविक्षेपमीनौघः waving of the arms as fishes, विक्रन्दितमहास्वनः cries of agony as its roar, प्रकीर्णकेशशैवालः dishevelled hair as its moss, कैकेयीबडबामुखः Kaikeyi as mouth of Badaba mythical seamare, मम to me, अश्रुवेगप्रभवः source of copious tears, कुब्जावाक्यमहाग्रहः the words of hunchback (Manthara) as monstrous crocodiles, नृशंसायाः cruel, वरवेल boons as shores, रामप्रव्राजनायतः exile of Rama as its expanse, अयम् this, शोकसागरः sea of sorrow, राघवं विना without Rama, मया by me, जीवता with my life, दुस्तरः difficult to cross, बत on what a pity
2::59::33::यः he who, अहम् I, अद्य now, दिदृक्षमाणः wishing to see, सलक्ष्मणम् with Lakshamana, राघवम् Rama, इह here, न लभे unable to get them, अशोभनम् inauspicious, इतीव in this way, महायशाः of great reknown, सः राजा that king, विलपन् lamenting, मूर्छितः lying unconcsious, तूर्णम् immediately, शयने on the bed, पपात fell.
2::59::34::पार्थिवे king, रामहेतोः for the sake of Rama, करुणतरम् in greater grief, द्विगुणं च doubly, विलपति lamenting, प्रणष्टे losing senses, राममाता Rama's mother, देवी queen Kausalya, तस्य वचनम् his words, अनुनिशम्य having heard, पुनरेव once again, भयम् fear, अगमत् seized.
