2::61::1::When Rama, the greatest among those who please the people, he who was conscious of his duty left for the forest. Kausalya, sobbing in bitter anguish, said to her husband: 
2::61::2::Your great fame has spread all over the three worlds. People know you as compassionate, generous and sweetspeaking scion of the Raghus. 
2::61::3::O Dasaratha, the best among kings, how will your two sons and Sita brought up in great comfort now tolerate the hardships of forest life? 
2::61::4::How can the daughter of Mithila (Sita) who in the prime of her life, accustomed to comforts, endure  heat and cold indeed?
2::61::5::How can the largeeyed Sita having enjoyed delicious food mixed with condiments and soup now partake the food prepared with wild grains?
2::61::6::How can the blameless Sita, used to the soft sound of songs and musical instruments hear the frightful roars of lions and other carnivorous animals?
2::61::7::Where will that mightyarmed and powerful Rama, as lofty as Indra's banner, sleep using his ironbarlike arm as pillow?.
2::61::8:: When shall I see Rama with his lotushued face, his beautiful locks of hair, breath of lotus fragrance and eyes like blue lotus? 
2::61::9::No doubt my heart must be made of thunderbolt, since unable to see Rama it does not split into a thousand pieces.
2::61::10::(O king) It is because of your heartless action, my Rama and my relatives who deserve to enjoy pleasures at this age have been banished and are miserably wandering in wilderness.
2::61::11::Even if Rama returns in the fifteenth year, it is unlikely that Bharata will give up the kingdom and royal treasury (in favour of Rama).
2::61::12::Some first feed their own relatives in shraddha ceremony and thereafter look for the best of brahmins to feed.
2::61::13::The godlike brahmins who are virtuous and learned will not accept the food after others have partaken even if it is ambrosia.
2::61::14::The bulls (best) among the wise brahmins would not like to accept the food after it is tasted by other brahmins, just as bulls dislike their horns being shorn.
2::61::15::O Lord of the world why not the eldest and the most distinguished among the brothers likewise disdain the kingdom enjoyed by the younger brother?
2::61::16::Just as a tiger will not eat the food acquired by another beast, Rama, the tiger (best) among men will not accept the kingdom enjoyed by others.
2::61::17::Havis, sacrificial offerings like ghee, cakes, kusha grass, and sacrificial posts made from khadira wood, once used in the sacrifice cannot be used again.
2::61::18::In the same way Rama will not accept this kingdom enjoyed by others like liquour or soma juice drained of its essence. 
2::61::19::Rama, highly determined will not suffer this indignity. If enraged, he can split open even mount Mandara with his sharp arrows.
2::61::20::Out of respect for his father magnanimous Rama is not inclined to kill you. He has not defied the anger, the Sun, the Moon and the sky looking wonderful with stars can be pulled down. He will not even shake or break the earth surrounded by hundreds of mountains.
2::61::21::A powerful tiger will not allow its tail to be twisted. In the same way Rama also will not tolerate an insult of this sort.
2::61::22::Even if all the worlds were to unite and fight against him, he will not fear. This righteous Rama will reestablish justice in this unrighteous world.
2::61::23::Valiant and mightyarmed Rama, with his golden shafts can annihilate all living beings and oceans like at the time of  deluge everything is consumed in fire.
2::61::24::Such Rama, the best among men, powerful like a lion, with eyes fierce like that of a bull has been destroyed by his own father just as the big fish destroys its own offsprings.
2::61::25::You have banished your son who is devoted to righteousness. Is it in accordance with the scriptures and the eternal tradition followed by the twiceborn?
2::61::26::O king for a woman the first refuge is the husband, the second her son, the third her relatives and there is no fourth alternative in this world.
2::61::27::You are nonexistent for my purpose. Rama has taken refuge in the forest and I do not like to go there. You have destroyed me in all possible ways.
2::61::28::You have destroyed this kingdom, and the state along with its inhabitants. You have ruined yourself along with your ministers. You have brought disaster to me and to my son. Your son (Bharata) and your wife (Kaikeyi) are the only persons who are happy.
2::61::29:: Hearing the words uttered in harrowing accents, the king overcome with deep distress became senseless. Recollecting his folly thereafter he fell into a sad state. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyfirst sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
