2::69::1::ते दूताः those messengers, यामेव on whichever, रात्रिम् night, तां पुरीम् that city, प्रविशन्ति स्म were entering, तां रात्रिम् that night, भरतेनापि by Bharata also, अयम् this, आप्रियः distressing, स्वप्नः dream, दृष्टः has been seen.
2::69::2::राजाधिराजस्य (the son) of the king of kings, पुत्रः son, तां रात्रिम् that night, व्युष्टाम् एव when dawn appeared, तम् that, अप्रियम् unpleasant, स्वप्नम् dream, दृष्ट्वा having seen, सुभृशम् extremely, पर्यतप्यत felt troubled.
2::69::3::प्रियवादिनः speaking pleasing words, वयस्याः peers, तप्यमानम् griefstricken, समाज्ञाय having observed, आयासम् despair, विनेष्यन्तः with a view to remove, सभायाम् in the assembly, कथाः stories, चक्रिरे made.
2::69::4::शान्तिम् to provide mental peace, वादयन्ति played stringed instruments, तथा similarly, अपरे some, नाटकानि dramatic scenes, लासयन्त्यपि danced, अपरे some, विविधानि various kinds of, हास्यानि jokes, प्राहुः told.
2::69::5::राघवः one born in the Raghu race, महात्मा the magnanimous, सः भरतः that Bharata, गोष्ठीहास्यानि conversations and jokes, कुर्वद्भि: while performing, प्रियवादिभिः were soothing words, सखिभिः by friends also, न प्राहृष्यत could not be delighted.
2::69::6::प्रियसखः one dear friend, सखिभिः with friends, वृतम् surrounded, भरतं addressing that Bharata, अब्रवीत् said, सखे O friend, सुहृद्भिः with friends, पर्युपासीनः accompanied by, किम् why, न अनुमोदसे you are not pleased.
2::69::7::भरतः Bharata, एवम् in this manner, ब्रुवाणम् saying, सुहृदम् his companion, प्रत्युवाच ह replied, मे my, यन्निमित्तम् for what reason, एतत् this, दैन्यम् desolation, उपागतम् that has overtaken me, त्वम् you, श्रुणु listen.
2::69::8::स्वप्ने in a dream, मलिनम् pale, मुक्तमूर्धजम् with dishevelled hair, अद्रिशिखरात् from the peak of a mountain, कलुषे dirty, गोमयह्रदे pool filled with cow dung, पतन्तम् falling down, पितरम् father, अद्राक्षम् saw.
2::69::9::सः he, तस्मिन् that, गोमयह्रदे in the pool filled with cow dung, प्लवमानः floating, अञ्जलिना with both palms cupped, तैलम् oil, पिबन् drinking मुहुर्मुहुः again and again, हसन् laughing, मे by me, दृष्टः was seen.
2::69::10::ततः thereafter, तिलौदनम् rice cooked with sesame seeds, भुक्त्वा eating, पुनः पुनः again and again, अधःशिराः plunging his head downwards, तैलेन with oil, अभ्यक्तसर्वाङ्ग: his body besmeared with oil, तैलमेव into the oil alone, अन्वगाहत entered.
2::69::11::अहम् I, स्वप्ने in the dream, सागरम् sea, शुष्कम् having dried up, चन्द्रम् Moon, भुवि on the ground, पतितम् having fallen down, जगतीम् the earth, तमस समावृताम् इव as if enveloped in  darkness, उपरुद्धाम् obscured, औपवाह्यस्य worthy of a ride, नागस्य elephant's, विषाणम् tusk,  शकलीकृतम् broken into pieces, ज्वलितम् blazing, जातवेदनम् fire, सहसा suddenly, संशान्तम् extinguished, पृथिवीम् earth, अवतीर्णां च split open, विविधान् various, द्रुमान् trees, शुष्कांश्च dried up, पर्वतान् mountains, विध्वस्तान् having been destroyed, सधूमान् with smoke, पश्यामि I see.
2::69::12::कार्ष्णायसे on an iron, पीठे seat, निषण्णम् resting, कृष्णवाससम्  clad in black clothes, एनं राजानं this king, कृष्णपिङ्गलाः having dark and brownish complexion, प्रमादाः women, प्रहसन्ति were laughing.
2::69::13::धर्मात्मा virtuous one, रक्तमाल्यानुलेपनः wearing garlands of red flowers and with his body  bedaubed with red sandal, त्वरमाणश्च hurrying off, खरयुक्तेन yoked with asses, रथेन on chariot, दक्षिणामुखः southward, प्रयातः went.
2::69::14::रक्तवासिनी clad in red coloured clothes, विकृतानना with an ugly appearance, राक्षसी प्रमदा a  demoness, प्रहसन्तीव as if mocking at him, राजानम् the king, प्रकर्षन्ती dragging, मया by me, दृष्टा was beheld.
2::69::15::एवम् in this manner, इमां रात्रिम् last night, भयावहम् frightening, एतत् this one, (मया)                           दृष्टम् was beheld (by me), अहम् either me, अथवा or, राजा the king, लक्ष्मणो वा or Lakshmana, मरिष्यति might die.
2::69::16::स्वप्ने in the dream, यः any one, नरः human, रस्वयुक्तेन yoked to asses, यानेन by carriage, याति sets out, अचिरात् in a short time, चितायाम् on the funeral pyre, तस्य his, धूमाग्रम् wreath of smoke of his deadbody ascending, सम्प्रदृश्यते will be seen. 
2::69::17::अहम् I, एतन्निमित्तम् for this reason, दीनः am desolate, तत् therefore, वः all of you, न प्रतिपूजये not responded well, मे my, कण्ठः throat, शुष्यतीव च is as though getting parched up, मे my, मनः mind, न स्वस्थम् इव is as though uneasy. 
2::69::18::भयस्थानम् any reason for apprehension, नपश्यामि I do not see, भयं चैव fear alone, उपधारये am experiencing, मे my, स्वरयोगः voice, भ्रष्टः degenerated, मम my, छाया च appearance, उपहता haggard, आत्मानम् of my self, जुगुप्सन्निव as if I detest, कारणम् च reason, न पश्यामि cannot see. 
2::69::19::अनेकरूपाम् of several images, पुरा formerly, अतर्किताम् unthought of, ताम् such, इमाम् this, दुःस्वप्नगतिम् the course of this nightmare, निशाम्य having perceived, राजानम् the king, अचिन्त्यदर्शनम् as incomprehensible view, विचिन्त्य having thought of, महत् great, तत् that, भयम् fear, मे हृदयात् from my heart, न याति does not go. 
