2::74::1::तदा then, भरतः Bharata, मातरम् mother, ताम् her, तथा in that manner, गर्हयित्वा having reproached, महता with great, रोषेण wrath, आविष्टः was overtaken, पुनरेव once again, वचः words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::74::2::नृशंसे O cruel one, दुष्टचारिणि of wicked conduct, कैकेयि O Kaikeyi, राज्यात् from the  kingdom, भ्रंशस्व may be deprived, धर्मेण by righteousness, परित्यक्ता abandoned, मृतम्  having died, मा about me, रुदती भव keep weepng.
2::74::3::ययोः to both of whom, त्वत्कृते on your account, तुल्यम् similar, मृत्युः death, विवासश्च exile, आगतौ have come, राजा the king, भृशधार्मिकः highly virtuous, रामो वा or Rama, ते to you, किन्नु what possible, अदूषयत् reviled?
2::74::4::अस्य कुलस्य of  this race, विनाशनात् by destruction, भ्रूणहत्याम् the sin of killing an unborn, प्राप्ता असि you have earned, कैकेयि Kaikeyi, नरकम् to hell, गच्छ go, भर्तुः to husband, सलोकताम् similar world, मा च not attain.
2::74::5::त्वया by you, घोरेण by a horrible, कर्मणा deed, यत् what ever reason, ईदृशम् such, पापम् sin, कृतम् has been committed, (for that reason), सर्वलोकप्रियम् beloved of all worlds, हित्वा renouncing, ममापि for me too, भयम् fear, आपादितम् has overtaken me.
2::74::6::त्वत्कृते for your sake, मे पिता my father, वृत्तः died, रामश्च Rama also, अरण्यम् to the forest, आश्रितः  taken refuge, त्वया by you, अहम् I, जीवलोके in this world of living beings, अयशः च ignominy, प्रतिपादितः obtained.
2::74::7::मम my, मातृरूपे mother in appearance, अमित्रे enemy, नृशंसे O cruel woman, राज्यकामुके O woman having lust for kingdom, दुर्वृत्ते of vicious character, पतिघातिनि murderess (of husband), अहम् I, ते to you, अभिभाष्यः नास्मि I shall not be speaking to you.
2::74::8::कुलदूषिणीम् one who vitiated the race, त्वाम् you, प्राप्य having obtained, कौशल्या Kausalya, सुमित्रा च Sumitra  also, मम my, याः अन्याः all the other, मातरः mothers, महता great, दुःखेन sorrow, आविष्टाः are overwhelmed.
2::74::9::यत् since, त्वया by you, धार्मिकः the virtuous, नित्यम् constantly, सत्यपरायणः ever devoted to truth, रामः Rama, वनम् to the forest, प्रस्थापितः has been sent away, पिता च father, दुःखात्  due to grief, त्रिदिवम् to heaven, गतः had gone, त्वम् you, धर्मराजस्य of the righteous king, धीमतः of the sagacious one, अश्वपतेः king Aswapati's, कन्या daughter, न not, तत्र in that race, जाता born, पितुः father's, कुलप्रध्वंसिनी destroying the race, राक्षसी असि you are a demoness.
2::74::10::यत्प्रधाना असि committing the sin with a sole objective, तत् that, पापम् sin, पित्रा विना separated from father, कृते made, भ्रातृभ्याम् by the brothers, परित्यक्ते abandoned, सर्वलोकस्य for the whole world, अप्रिये च not a dear one, मयि fallen on me.
2::74::11::पापनिश्चये O woman of sinful convictions, निरयगामिनि O one who would attain hell, धर्मसंयुक्ताम् endowed with righteous conduct, कौशल्याम् Kausalya, वियुक्ताम् separated from her son, कृत्वा having committed, अद्य now, कं लोसकम् what afterworld, प्राप्स्यसे will attain.
2::74::12::क्रूरे O cruel one, कौशल्यायाः Kausalya's, आत्मसम्भवम् born of her very self, रामम् Rama, नियतम् selfrestrained, बन्धुसंश्रयम् refuge for relations, ज्येष्ठम् eldest, पितृसमम् the equal of his father, किं नावबुध्यसे why do you not realise?
2::74::13::पुत्र: son, अङ्गप्रत्यङ्गजः born from every limb big or small, हृदयाच्चापि from the heart too, जायते is born, तस्मात् therefore, मातुः for a mother, प्रियतमः most beloved one, बान्धवाः relatives, प्रिया एव तु are loving ones only. 
2::74::14::अन्यदा at some other time, धर्मज्ञा conversant with righteous ways, सुरसम्मता highly respected by the gods, सुरभिः Surabhi (the divine cow), उर्व्याम् on the earth, वहमानौ carrying the burden (drawing the plough), विगतचेतसौ  senses lost, पुत्रौ sons, ददर्श किल beheld, as they say. 
2::74::15::महीतले on the earth, अर्धदिवसे at midday, श्रान्तौ tired, पुत्रौ sons, दृष्ट्वा having seen, पुत्रशोकेन by the grief for her son, बाष्पपर्याकुलेक्षणा eyes filled with tears, रुरोद wailed.
2::74::16::तस्याः her (Kamadhenu's), सूक्ष्माः fine, सुरभिगन्धिनः fragrant, बिन्दवः tear drops, अधस्तात् down below, व्रजतः proceeding, महात्मनः great, सुरराज्ञः of the king of the gods, गात्रे on the body, पतिताः fell.
2::74::17::सुरेश्वरः lord of the gods, इन्द्रोऽपि Indra, स्वगात्रे on his body, पुण्यगन्धिनम् of holy fragrance, तम् that, अश्रुपातम् flow of tears, दृष्ट्वा on seeing, ताम् her, भूयसीम् venerated, सुरभिम् as Kamadhenu, मन्यते thought
2::74::18::शक्रः Indra, आकाशे in the sky, निरीक्षमाणः looking up, स्थिताम् stationed, विष्ठिताम् distressed, दीनाम् miserable, रुदन्तीम् wailing, भृशदुःखिताम् in intense pain, तां सुरभिम् to that Surabhi,  ददर्श beheld.
2::74::19::वज्रपाणिः wielder of thunderbolt, सुरराजः king of the gods, इन्द्रः Indra, शोकसन्तप्ताम्  consumed with grief, यशस्विनीम् renowned, ताम् that kamadhenu, दृष्ट्वा having seen, उद्विग्नः alarmed, प्राञ्जलिः with palms joined in reverence, वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::74::20::सर्वहितैषिणि O wellwisher of all, अस्मासु for us, कुतश्चित् from any quarter, महत् great, भयम् fear, न विद्यते कच्छित् does not exist, ते your, शोकः sorrow, कुतोनिमित्तः for what  reason, ब्रूहि  speak.
2::74::21::धीमता by the  sagacious, सुरराजेन by Indra, king of the gods, एवम् this way, उक्ता having been uttered, धीरा calm, सुरभिः Surabhi, ततः then, वाक्य विशारदा proficient in speech, वाक्यम् these words, प्रत्युवाच replied.
2::74::22::अमराधिपः O lord of the immortals (Indra), पापम् शान्तम् god forbid, वः for you, कुतश्चित् from any quarter, किञ्चित् any calamity, न not, सुराधिप O lord of the gods, अहम् I, विषमे in trouble, स्थितौ entangled, सूर्यरश्मिप्रतापितौ scorched by the rays of the Sun, कृशौ emaciated, कर्षकेण by a ploughman, बाध्यमानौ beaten, मग्नौ immersed in grief, स्वपुत्रौ my own sons, एतौ these, बलीवर्धौ pair of bulls, दृष्ट्वा having seen, दीनौ miserable, शोचामि weeping. 
2::74::23::अहम् I, भारपीडितौ oppressed by the burden, दुःखितौ anguished, यौ them both, दृष्ट्वा  having seen, परितप्ये excessively grieving, मम my, कायात् from the body, प्रसूतौ हि were born, पुत्रसमः equal to a son, प्रियः a beloved, नास्ति no one is there. 
2::74::24::यस्याः whose, पुत्रसहस्रैः by a thousand sons, इदं जगत् this world, व्याप्तम् are spread over, ताम् to her (Kamadhenu), रुदतीम् weeping, दृष्ट्वा having seen, शक्रः Indra, सुतात् more than a son, परम् great one, न not, मन्यते considers.
2::74::25::लोकधारणकाम्यया with a desire to nourish the worlds, सदा always, अप्रतिमवृत्तायाः of unequalled conduct, श्रीमत्याः endowed with prosperity, स्वभावपरिचेष्टया in accordance with her nature, गुणनित्यायाः by her virtues, यस्याः such ones, पुत्रसहस्राणि a thousand sons, सा that, कामधुक् अपि Kamadhenu also, शोचति is weeping, या कौशल्या that Kausalya, रामं विना bereft of Rama, वर्तयिष्यति will she be her normal self again?, किं पुनः why again. 
2::74::26::एकपुत्रा च blessed with an only son, साध्वी च pious woman, इयम् this lady, त्वया by you, विवत्सा childless, कृता has been rendered, तस्मात् therefore, त्वम् you, प्रेत्य च even after death, इह च in this world also, सततम् always, दुःखम् grief, लप्स्यसे you shall experience.
2::74::27::अहम् I, भ्रातुः for my brother, पितुश्च for father, इमाम् this, सकलाम् complete, अपचितिम्   atonement for improper conduct, यशसः of fame, वर्धनम् enhancement, करिष्यामि will do, संशयः doubt, न not.
2::74::28::महाबलम् highly powerful, कौशल्यायाः तनयम् Kausalya's son, अनाययित्वा if I do not bring back, स्वयमेव myself, मुनिनिषेवितम् frequented by the ascetics, वनम् lonely forest, प्रवेक्ष्यामि I shall enter. 
2::74::29::पापे O vicious one, पापसङ्कल्पे O evilintentioned one, अहम् I, अश्रुकण्ठैः by those whose throats are choked with tears, पौरैः by the citizens (of Ayodhya), निरीक्षितः am watched, त्वया by you, कृतम् has been committed, पापम् sin, धारयितुम् to endure, न शक्तः हि I am not capable.
2::74::30::सा त्वम् such a person like you, अग्निं वा either the fire, प्रविश enter, दण्डकान्वा or Dandaka forest, स्वयम् yourself, विश enter वा or, कण्ठे round the throat, रज्जुम् rope, बधान fasten, ते to you, अन्यत् any other, परायणम् recourse, न हि is not there.
2::74::31::सत्यपराक्रमे having truth as his prowess, रामे Rama, अवनीम् this earth (kingdom), प्राप्ते will obtain, अहमपि I also, विप्रवासितकल्मषः free from all blemishes, कृतकृत्यः shall have my desire  accomplished, भविष्यामि shall become. 
2::74::32::इति in this way, अरण्ये in the forest, तोमराङ्कुशचोदितः driven by prods and goads (sharp instruments), नागः इव like an elephant, सङ्कृद्धः enraged, पन्नगः इव like a serpent, निःश्वसन् hissing, भुवि on the ground, पपात fell down. 
2::74::33::तदा then, संरक्तनेत्रः with bloodshot eyes, शिथिलाम्भरः with his raiment in disarray, विधूतसर्वाभरणः with his ornaments tossed about, भूमौ on the ground, पतितः fallen, परन्तपः scorcher of enemies, नृपात्मजः king's son, उत्सवक्षये at the close of the festival, शचीपतेः of the husband of Sachi (Indra's), केतुरिव बभूव like a banner remained.
