2::73::1::भरतः Bharata, पितरम् father, वृत्तम् had passed away, भ्रातरौ the two brothers, विवासितौ  were in exile, श्रुत्वा तु having heard, दुःखसन्तप्तः afflicted with sorrow, इदम् these, वचनम् words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::73::2::पित्रा च with father, अथ and, पितृसमेन like to a father to me, भ्रात्राच with brother, विहीनस्य bereft, शोचतः of a grieving one, हतस्य fallen into misfortunes, मम to me, इह now, राज्येन with the kingdom, किं नु कार्यम् of what avail?
2::73::3::राजानम् king, प्रेतभावस्थम् reducing to a corpse, रामं च also Rama, तापसम् as an ascetic, कृत्वा having made, मे to me, दुःखे in one sorrow, दुःखं another sorrow, (मे) अकरोः you have caused, व्रणे in the wound, क्षारम् salt, आदधाः इव like putting.
2::73::4::त्वम् you, कुलस्य family's, अभावाय for destruction, कालरात्रिरिव like a fatal night, आगता  have arrived, मे पिता my father, अङ्गारम् a live charcoal, उपगूह्य having embraced, नावबुद्धवान् did not realize.
2::73::5::पापदर्शिनि O woman of sinful thoughts, त्वया by you, मे पिता my father, मृत्युम् death, आपादितः was led to, कुलपांसनि O obloquy of the race, मोहात् out of folly, अस्मिन्  कुले in this family, सुखम् happiness, परिहृतम् has been taken away.
2::73::6::मे my, पिता father, सत्यसन्धः adhering to truth, महायशाः renowned, नृपः king, दशरथः Dasaratha, अद्य now, त्वाम् you, प्राप्य having come under your influence, तीव्र दुःखाभिसन्तप्तः tormented by intense grief, वृत्तः has departed from this world.
2::73::7::धर्मवत्सलः righteous, महाराजः great king, मे पिता my father, कस्मात् for what reason, विनाशितः has been destroyed, रामः Rama, कस्मात् for what reason, प्रव्राजितः has been exiled, वनम् to the forest, गतः has gone.
2::73::8::पुत्रशोकाभिपीडिते tormented by the grief on account of separation from their sons, कौशल्या च Kausalya and, सुमित्रा च Sumitra too, मम जननीम् my own mother, त्वाम् you, प्राप्य having obtained, जीवेतां यदि will survive, दुष्करम् difficult.
2::73::9::धर्मत्मा righteous, गुरुवृत्तिज्ञः well aware of his duties towards elders, आर्योऽपि noble, too  मातरि towards his mother, यथा as, वर्तते conducted himself, त्वयि towards you, अनुत्तमाम् very great, वृत्तिम् conduct, वर्तते ननु is abiding indeed.
2::73::10::तथा in the same way, मे my, ज्येष्टा eldest, माता mother, दीर्घदर्शिनी a lady with farsight, कौशल्या Kausalya, धर्मम् righteousness, समास्थाय having adhered, त्वयि towards you, भगिन्यामिव as if a sister, वर्तते हि conducted
2::73::11::पापे O perverse wretch, कृतात्मानम् a man pure in mind, तस्याः Kauslaya's, पुत्रम् son, चीरवल्कलवाससम् made to adorn garments made of bark, वनवासाय to dwell in the forest, प्रस्थाप्य having sent, कथम् how, न शोचसि you do not feel remorseful?
2::73::12::अपापदर्शनम् one who never contemplated evil, शूरम् valiant, कृतात्मानम् having control over his mind, यशस्विनम् the glorious, चीरवसनम् clad in bark clothes, प्रव्राज्य after being exiled, किन्नु what possible, कारणम् reason, पश्यसि do you see?
2::73::13::लुब्धायाः of avaricious, ते to you, अहम् I, राघवं प्रति to Rama, न विदितः were unaware of, मन्ये I deem, तथाहि that is proper, त्वया by you, राज्यार्थम् for the sake of kingdom, अयम् this, महान् great, अनर्थः calamity, आनीतः has been brought about.
2::73::14::अहम् I, पुरुषव्याघ्रौ two tigers among men, रामलक्ष्मणौ Rama and Lakshmana, अपश्यन् without beholding them, केन with what, शक्तिप्रभावेन by the mighty power, राज्यम् kingdom, रक्षितुम् to protect, उत्सहे will be competent?
2::73::15::महाबलः  mighty, धर्मात्मा righteous one, महाराजः great king, नित्यम् always, बलवन्तम् all powerful, तम् Rama, मेरुः mount Meru, मेरुवनं यथा just as the forest surrounding Meru, उपाश्रितः अभूत् हि used to rely upon.
2::73::16::सः अहम् such as me, इमं भारम् this burden, आसाद्य having taken, महाधुर्यसमुद्धृतम् carried by a great bull fit to be yoked, धुरम् the weight, दम्यः इव like an young bullock requiring training, केन by what, ओजसा strength, वहेयम् I shall bear? 
2::73::17::अथवा or, योगैः by employing the four expedients (conciliation, bribery, sowing dissenssions and punishment), बुद्धिबलेन वा or with the strength of intellect, मे to me, शक्तिः भवेत् I might get strength, अहम् I, पुत्रगर्धिनीम् covetous of son, त्वाम् you, सकामाम्  having fulfilled your ambition, न करिष्यामि will not do.
2::73::18::त्वयि towards you, रामस्य of Rama, सदा always, मातृवत् just like his mother, अवेक्षा न स्याद्यदि if it were not so, पापनिश्चयाम् having sinful conviction, त्वाम् you, त्यक्तुम् to renounce, मे to me, विकाङ्क्षा disinclination, न जायेत will not cause.
2::73::19::पापदर्शिनि O sinful woman, साधुचरित्रविभ्रष्टे one fallen from virtuous conduct, नः our, पूर्वेषाम् for our ancestors, विगर्हिता reproachable, इयं बुद्धि: this thought, तव to you, कथम् how, उत्पन्ना originated.
2::73::20::अस्मिन् in this, कुले race, पूर्वेषाम् of our ancestors, ज्येष्ठः the eldest one, राज्ये in the kingdom, अभिषिच्यते हि is indeed installed, अपरे the rest of them, भ्रातरः brothers, तस्मिन् in the eldest, समाहिताः concentrate their attention, प्रवर्तन्ते conduct themselves.
2::73::21::नृशंसे O cruel lady, त्वम् you, राजधर्मम् royal tradition, न अवेक्षसे are not looking at, वा  or, राजवृत्तस्य royal tradition's, शाश्वतीम् everlasting, गतिम् consequences, न विजानासि are ignorant, मन्ये I suppose. 
2::73::22::राजवृत्ते in royal custom, सततम् always, ज्येष्ठः the eldest son, राज्ये in the kingdom, अभिषिच्यते is consecrated, एतत् this, राज्ञाम् to all kings, समम् is the same, तत् that,  इक्ष्वाकूणाम् for Ikshvakus, विशेषतः स्यात् especially it applies.
2::73::23::धर्मैकरक्षाणाम् with righteousness as their sole protection, कुलचारित्रशोभिनाम् befitting the  ancestral traditions of the noble race, तेषाम् those (Ikshvaku kings)', चारित्रशौण्डीर्यम् pride about their tradition, अद्य now, त्वाम् you, प्राप्य after admitting, विनिवर्तितम् has been topsyturvied.
2::73::24::तव your, कुलपूर्वगाः ancestors of your family, जनेन्द्राः अपि kings also, सुमहाभागाः were highly distinguished, गर्हितः censured, अयम् this, बुद्धेः mind's, मोहः delusion, त्वयि in you, कथम् how, सम्भूतः originated.
2::73::25::पापनिश्चये O woman of sinful convictions, अहं तु I on my part, तव your, कामम्  cherished desire, न करिष्यामि will not fulfil, त्वया by you, मम my, जीवितान्तकरम् bringing an end to my existence, व्यसनम् distressing deed, आरब्धम् has commenced.
2::73::26::एषः अहं तु as for me, इदानीम् now itself, तव your, अप्रियार्थम् for the sake of causing displeasure, अनघम् faultless, स्वजनप्रियम् the beloved of his people, भ्रातरम् my brother, वनात् from the forest, निवर्तयिष्यामि will make him turn back.
2::73::27::रामम् Rama, निवर्तयित्वा after bringing back, सुस्थिरेण with a steady, अन्तरात्मना and heart, दीप्ततेजसः with radiating lustre, तस्य to him, दासभूतः like a servant, भविष्यामि I shall become.
2::73::28::महात्मा highsouled, भरतः Bharata, इत्येवम् in this manner, उक्त्वा having spoken, प्रियेतरैः unpleasant, वाक्यगणैः with words, ताम् her, तुदन् afflicting, शोकातुरः overwhelmed with grief, पर्वतगह्वरस्थः inside a mountaincave, सिंहो यथा like a lion, भूयश्चापि once again, ननाद cried out loudly.
