2::75::1::On regaining his senses after a long time, the valiant Bharata looked at his unfortunate mother whose eyes were filled with tears, and condemned her amidst the counsellors.
2::75::2::Neither did I ever desire the kingdom nor did I ever consult my mother in this regard and I am not even aware of the consecration that was planned by the king for I was away in a distant country with Satrughna.
2::75::3:: I knew nothing of the banishment of great Rama nor did I know how Lakshmana or Sita had gone on exile.
2::75::4::As magnanimous Bharata was wailing, Kausalya recognised his voice and said to Sumitra:
2::75::5::Bharata, the farsighted son of Kaikeyi of cruel deeds has come and I wish to see him.
2::75::6:: Having said so to Sumitra, Kausalya trembling and almost lifeless, emaciated, sullied and turned pallid set out for the place where Bharat was.
2::75::7::But at the same time Bharata, the younger brother of Rama accompanied by Satrughna  proceeded to the place where Kausalya resided.
2::75::8::Then agonised Bharata and Satrughna, beholding that venerable, noblehearted, griefstricken, weeping Kausalya who was  almost semiconscious overcome with grief, approached her with great sorrow and hugged her.
2::75::9:: Looking at Bharata, the deeply afflicted Kausalya said, The kingdom which you had desired has been acquired without any obstacle. Alas Kaikeyi had quickly secured it for you  through her crooked act.
2::75::10::What advantage did cruel Kaikeyi visualize in sending away my son to dwell in the forest  wearing robes of bark?
2::75::11:: Kaikeyi should send me also without any delay to that place where my illustrious  Rama with golden navel dwells.
2::75::12:: Or else I, accompanied by Sumitra, shall go happily on my own holding the sacred fire in front to that place where Rama dwells. 
2::75::13:: Or, you should now take me personally to that place where, my son Rama, the best among men, is performing austerities.
2::75::14::This vast kingdom, with all its abundance of wealth and grain, elephants, horses and chariots has been delivered to you by her.
2::75::15::Thus reproached by many a harsh word, like needle pricking a wound, the sinless Bharata was intensely pained.  
2::75::16::(Having heard these words), his senses reeling, he became unconscious, lamented profusaly and fell at her feet. And on regaining his senses, he stood motionless.
2::75::17:: As Kausalya was lamenting in this manner, overwhelmed with deep grief, Bharata, his palms joined in reverence, replied her in these words:
2::75::18::O noble lady unaware (of what had happened), I am guiltless. Why do you upbraid me? You know well my profound, steadfast affection for Raghava (Rama).
2::75::19::Did not the one who counselled the banishment of my noble brother who is steadfast and bound by truth and virtue, ever adhered to scriptures?(or)My noble brother (Rama), the best among the virtuous, bound to truth, is banished. Let not such thought occur at any time to one who steadfastly adheres to scriptures 
2::75::20::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother, Rama be cursed with the sin of undergoing servitude in the hands of most sinful of men, the sin of passing urine facing the Sun and of kicking a sleeping cow.
2::75::21::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the demerit of unrighteousness in the same way as a master who gets a difficult work done by a servant without remuneration.
2::75::22::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way as a man  acting treacherously against a king who rules like a father and protects his subjects like his own children, acquires. 
2::75::23::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire unrighteousness in the same way as a king who, having received one sixth of the income as tax from people does not protect them
2::75::24::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way as a person acquires for having promised the ascetics the required offering at a sacrifice and later denies them
2::75::25::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the demerit in the same way as a person, who having gone to the battleground abundantly provided with elephants, horses, chariots and weapons fails to discharge the duty (of a fighter)
2::75::26::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire demerit in the same way as an evilhearted person who forever destroys the subtle meaning of the scriptures imparted carefully by a sagacious preceptor
2::75::27::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother be highly unfortunate like me in not being able to behold that longarmed and broadshoulderd one seated on the throne and resembling both the Sun and the Moon in radiance
2::75::28:: May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the demerit in the same way as a person, who partakes the sweet milkrice, sesamerice and goat's flesh without purpose (without invoking and offering it to the gods) and disrespects the teachers
2::75::29::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way a person who kicks the cows abuses elders and causes great offence to his friends
2::75::30::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother, acquire the sin in the same way as a wickedminded person, who divulges the words of abuse secretly confided in him by his friends.
2::75::31::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother be hated universally as one who never helps any one, who is ungrateful, shameless and as one who has committed the sin of suicide
2::75::32::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother  acquire the sin in the same way as one who, although surrounded by wife, children and servants, eats the delicacies all alone without sharing acquires.
2::75::33::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother die without winning a worthy wife and without begetting offspring and without performing religious deeds
2::75::34:: May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother live an entire life of anguish without begetting children through his wife or without seeing his own children
2::75::35::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the same sin as one acquires for murdering a king, a woman, children and the aged and deserting dependents
2::75::36::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the same sin as one who supports his wife and children by trafficking in lac, wine, meat and metal and poison acquires
2::75::37:: May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the same sin like a warrior, dreadful to the enemy side who will be slain while fleeing from the war at its peak
2::75::38::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother, wander this earth, begging alms, holding a human skull like an insane man dressed in rags
2::75::39::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother be always addicted to wine, women and gambling and be swayed by desire and anger
2::75::40::May the mind of that man who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother not be established in virtue May he practise unrighteousness and confer charity on the unworthy
2::75::41::May that man's accumulated extensive posssessions of various kinds of wealth be  snatched away by thieves in thousands of ways if he had counselled the exile of my esteemed brother
2::75::42::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the extent of demerit fixed for a person, who sleeps at the hour of twilight of dawn and dusk
2::75::43::May that one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way as a person who sets fire to human settlements, violates the preceptors's bed and betrays his friend
2::75::44::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother, acquire the sin in the same way as a person who fails to show obedience to the gods and the ancestors and to serve his parents
2::75::45::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother be expelled  this very moment from the world approved by virtuous men, from their renown and from their (noble) actions
2::75::46::The one who counselled the exile of my noble, longarmed and broadchested brother be banished like the one who commited the sin of leaving the ministration to his mother and engaging himself in purposeless acts
2::75::47::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother be always miserable with many sons, poverty and fever and disease 
2::75::48::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way a person disappoints who miserable mendicants seeking alms and looking up to him for help
2::75::49::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way as a person, who is abusive, niggardly, impure, unrighteous and always afraid of being caught by the king, and lives by cheating others, acquires
2::75::50::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way as a wickedminded person who neglects his chaste wife observing the menstrual period unfavourable for conception and had bathed after menstruation  acquires
2::75::51::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way a foolish person who abandons righteous conduct and  forsakes his rightfully married wife and resorts to other man's wife acquires
2::75::52::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the same sin like that of a lowbred brahmin who commits an irreversible sin acquires
2::75::53::May the sin of polluting drinking water and administering poison to others be put together and be incurred by the man who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother
2::75::54:: May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way a person with befouled senses disturbs the offerings of worship kept ready for a brahmin and milks the cow having a young calf acquires.
2::75::55::May the one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way a person who in possession of water does not give it to one suffering from thirst acquires it
2::75::56::May that one who counselled the exile of my esteemed brother acquire the sin in the same way a person acquires while giving onesided judgement between divided religious disputants
2::75::57::While thus appeasing Kausalya deprived of her husband and son, Bharata, filled with grief, fell down at her feet.
2::75::58::Kausalya said these words to Bharata who fell unconscious, consumed with grief, while swearing on painful oaths.
2::75::59::O son by swearing on oaths, you are choking the very breath of my life and my suffering has grown still more.  
2::75::60::O dear child, fortunately your mind is unswerved from righteousness. You being truthful to your promise shall attain the world of virtuous men along with Lakshmana.
2::75::61::After having addressed Bharata, who was affectionate towards his brother that way, Kausalya  drew the mightyarmed one onto her lap and hugged him and cried out with extreme grief.
2::75::62::Afflicted by sorrow and lamenting thus, great Bharata's mind became unsteady owing to swooning and  besieged by grief.
2::75::63::That night passed off in grief for Bharata, who fell on the ground with his mind clouded and his senses lost. He lamented again and again, heaving deep, warm sighs. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चसप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventyfifth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
