2::46::1::The scion of the Raghus (Rama), having taken shelter on the lovely bank of Tamasa, glanced at Sita and said to Lakshmana thus:
2::46::2::O Lakshmana, this happens to be the first night of our exile. You should not have any longing in your mind. Wish you well 
2::46::3::Look at the deserted forest. The wild animals and birds have returned to their hideouts. They fill the air with their cries.
2::46::4::There is no doubt that now the men and women of Ayodhya, father's capital city must be bewailing our departure.
2::46::5::O best of men because of our many virtues, the people (of Ayodhya) are indeed loyal to the king, to you, to me and to Satrughna and Bharata, too.
2::46::6::What distresses me is the thought that both father and illustrious mother may become blind by repeated weeping (over us). 
2::46::7:: Righteous Bharata will indeed console parents with words in conformity with  dharma, artha and kama.
2::46::8::As I reflect again and again on the benevolent nature of Bharata, there is no concern in me about my parents, O Lakshmana
2::46::9:: You, O Lakshmana, the best among men, have done a good job by accompanying me. Otherwise assistance for Sita's protection would have been sought (necessary). 
2::46::10::O Lakshmana, I shall live this night on water alone. I prefer it, though various kinds of forest products are available.
2::46::11:: Having said so to Lakshmana, he turned to Sumantra to say O gentle friend, tend the horses with care.
2::46::12:: As the Sun was setting, Sumantra tethered the horses, fed them with abundant fodder and sat close to them.
2::46::13:: Then the charioteer worshipping the auspicious Sandhya (twilight), and seeing the night approach made  bed for Rama and Lakshmana. 
2::46::14::Having seen the bed of leaves made ready on the bank of Tamasa, Rama lay down there along with Sita and Lakshmana.  
2::46::15:: Having seen that his brother along with his wife had fallen asleep, Lakshmana narrated the many virtues of Rama to Sumantra. 
2::46::16::Lakshmana continued to describe Rama's virtues to the charioteer, keeping awake that entire night on the bank of Tamasa until the Sun rose.
2::46::17::Rama spent the night with his subjects not very far from the bank of Tamasa which was crowded with herds of cattle.
2::46::18:: On getting up, the brilliant Rama looked at his subjects and said to his brother Lakshmana full of noble qualities: 
2::46::19::O Lakshmana, son of Sumitra look at these people, fast alseep under the trees. Out of affection for us, they are even indifferent to their home. 
2::46::20::On seeing the people's resolve to take us back, it appears they are prepared to give up their lives rather than abandon their determination.
2::46::21:: While they are asleep, we shall quickly mount the chariot and fearlessly proceed on the way. 
2::46::22::These loyal inhabitants of Ayodhya, the city of the Ikshvakus will no more sleep again shelterd under the trees. 
2::46::23::The prince should deliver the citizens from the sufferings caused by themselves but should not make them suffer on their account. 
2::46::24::Lakshmana said to Rama who was the very image of like righteousness O wise one, I like this (proposal). Let us quickly mount the chariot. 
2::46::25::Then glorious Rama addressing Sumantra said O master charioteer, harness the chariot. I shall (let us) quickly leave for the forest.
2::46::26::Thereupon the charioteer hurriedly harnessed the splendid horses to the chariot and informed Rama with folded hands: 
2::46::27:: O best among riders the chariot has been harnessed. O mightyarmed one, board it along with Sita and Lakshmana. All the best 
2::46::28::Rama (along with others) mounted the chariot with his belongings, crossed the rapidly flowing Tamasa agitated with whirlpools.  
2::46::29::Having crossed the river, the mightyarmed and gracious Rama proceeded on the auspicious and thornless highway arousing confidence even in the timid.
2::46::30::With the intention of confusing the citizens, Rama said to the charioteer, O Sumantra, having seated in the chariot proceed speedly for a while in northerly direction and again turn back the chariot. Accomplish this feat in such a manner that the citizens will not know (where we have gone).
2::46::31::The charioteer did as instructed by Rama, returned to him with the chariot and informed (of its readiness).
2::46::32::When Rama and Lakshmana, perpetuaters of the Raghu race along with Sita were seated on the wellyoked chariot, Sumantra urged the horses to move. 
2::46::33::As it augurs well to travel north Sumantra placed the chariot in that direction. Thereafter that great charioteer, Rama, Sita and Lakshmana boarded the chariot and departed.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षट्चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortysixth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
