2::84::1::Guha, king of the nishadas, observed the bannered army encamped all along the bank of the river Ganga, hurried off and said to his kinsmen:
2::84::2::Here is an army as vast as the ocean, and I am unable to comprehend its magnitude even mentally.
2::84::3::It appears that the evilminded Bharata himself has come here. The emblem of a huge kovidara (pomegranate) tree is seen on his chariot.   
2::84::4::Could it be that Bharata, son of Kaikeyi, has come here to bind us with the cords or to slay us? Or is he marching forward with the intention of taking possession of a prosperous, rare kingdom by slaying Rama who has been banished by his father:
2::84::5::Rama, son of Dasaratha, is not only my master but also my friend. Therefore, to safeguard his interests remain stationed here on the bank of the river Ganga.
2::84::6::Let all the fishermen, who live on meat, roots and fruits and protect the river, stay here with the troops by taking up positions along the banks of the river Ganga.
2::84::7::Let five hundred boats, each manned by a hundred young fishermen fully equipped, be in readiness he exhorted them. 
2::84::8::Should it happen that Bharata is not illdisposed toward Rama, the army will safe cross the river Ganga today itself.
2::84::9::Having spoken thus, Guha, lord of the nishadas, approached Bharata, taking with him fish, meat and wine as offerings.
2::84::10::The valiant Sumantra, conversant with ways of modesty, observed Guha approaching them and humbly informed Bharata. 
2::84::11:: Guha who has come here surrounded by too many thousands of his relations is fully acquainted with the Dandaka forest. He is an aged man and a friend of your brother said Sumatra.
2::84::12::O scion of the Kakusthas (Bharata) therefore, give audience to the overlord of the nishadas, Guha, who undoubtedly knows the whereabouts of Rama and Lakshmana.
2::84::13:: On hearing these auspicious words of Sumantra, Bharata said Let Guha see me at once.
2::84::14::Having obtaind the permission, a delighted Guha, escorted by his relatives,  approached Bharata and humbly said:
2::84::15::This country is like a pleasuregarden at the backyard of your palace. All of us are  subordinate to you and we solicit you to stay in the house of  this servant of yours.
2::84::16::Here are roots, fruits and a great variety of forest produce, fresh and dried meat brought by the nishadas.
2::84::17::We hope your army having  refreshed themselves will spend the night here. With our hospitality extended, you can proceed tomorrow.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुरशीतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eightyfourth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
