2::81::1::Thereafter bards and panegyrists adept in conversation with an auspicious start pleased Bharata with eulogy in the last part of the night. 
2::81::2::The drums of the night watch were beaten by golden sticks. Conches in hundreds were blown and sounds of various modulations were created.
2::81::3::The shrill trempets which seemed to fill the heavens caused much more distress to the already griefstricken Bharata.
2::81::4::Then Bharata waking up, exclaimed, I am not the king, ordered the pipers to stop and said to Satrughna:
2::81::5::O Satrughna see what great harm has been done to these people at the instance of Kaikeyi. King Dasaratha has gone, leaving me to suffer. 
2::81::6::This kingdom, rooted in the righteousness of that noble king, is now whirling like a boat in a whirlpool without a helmsman.
2::81::7::Even Rama, a great protector for all of us, has been banished to the forest by my mother bereft of virtuous conduct.
2::81::8::Thus lamenting, Bharata fainted. Seeing him (in this state) all the women (of the inner apartment) at once cried aloud piteously.
2::81::9::While Bharata was weeping, illustrious Vasistha, conversant with royal traditions, entered the assembly hall of the lord of the Iksvakus (king Dasaratha).
2::81::10::Righteous Vasistha along with his disciples reached the lovely golden assembly hall  inlaid with gems and precious stones, which resembled Sudharma, (the assembly hall of Indra).
2::81::11::Vasistha, wellversed in all the Vedas, sat on a golden seat with a comfortable cover and ordered the messengers:
2::81::12::Fetch quietly brahmins, kshatriyas, vaisyas, ministers and army commanders at once. A matter of great urgency awaits us. 
2::81::13::Bring all the royal attendants, Satrughna, the illustrious Bharata, Yudhajit, Sumantra and all those wellwishers of the king.
2::81::14::As they (invitees) began arriving on chariots, horses and elephants, there arose a great tumult.
2::81::15::Then as Bharata apprroached,  ministers and subjects greeted him as they used to greet Dasaratha, just as gods greet Indra, the performer of a hundred sacrifices.
2::81::16::The assembly hall looked splendid like a lake of tranquil waters with gems, shells  pebbles, grains of sand and teeming with whales and serpents in the presence of the son of king Dasaratha. It appeared as though Dasaratha himself was present.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकाशीतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eightyfirst sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
