2::54::1::ते they (Rama, Sita and Lakshmana), शिवाम् auspicious, रजनीम् night, तस्मिन् that, महावृक्षे big tree, उषित्वा having remained, विमले when the bright, सूर्ये Sun, अभ्युदिते had risen, तस्मात् देशात् from that region, प्रतस्थिरे set out. 
2::54::2::यशश्विनः illustrious, ते they, सुमहत् very great, वनम् forest, विगाह्य having entered, विविधान् different, भूमिभागान् regions of the land, अदृष्टपूर्वान् hithertounseen, मनोरमान् enchanting, देशांश्चापि regions also, तत्र तत्र here and there, पश्यन्तः viewing, यमुना Yamuna, यत्र where, भागीरथीम् Bhagirathi, गङ्गाम् Ganga's, अभिप्रवर्तते flows into, तं देशम् that place, उद्दिश्य intending (to reach), जग्मुः went.
2::54::3::सः रामः that Rama, यथा क्षेमेण on a safe way, गच्छन् going, विविधान् various, द्रुमान् trees, पश्यंश्च looking at, दिवसे day, निवृत्तमात्रे when ended, सौमित्रिम् to Lakshmana, अब्रवीत् said.
2::54::4::सौमित्रे O son of Sumitra, Lakshmana, प्रयागम् अभितः near Prayaga, उन्नतम् rising high, भगवतः of the venerable, अग्नेः fire's, केतुम् the banner, धूमम् smoke, पश्य look, मुनिः the sage, सन्निहितः close by, मन्ये I think.
2::54::5::वयम् we, गङ्गायमुनयोः Ganga and Yamuna, सम्भेदम् confluence, प्राप्ताः स्म have reached,  नूनम् it is certain, तथा हि as for, वारिघट्टितः dashed by waters, वारिणः waters, शब्दः sound, श्रूयते is heard.
2::54::6::वनजैः by the foresters, उपजीविभिः those people subsisting on them, परिभिन्नानि are broken,  दारूणि logs of wood, भरद्वाजाश्रमे in the hermitage of Bharadwaja, एते all these, विविधाः different, द्रुमाश्च trees also, दृश्यन्ते are seen.
2::54::7::धन्विनौ the two archers, तौ those two, सुखम् comfortably, गत्वा having gone,  दिवाकरे Sun, लम्बमाने was hanging, गङ्गायमुनयोः of Ganga and yamuna, सन्धौ at the confluence, मुनेः of sage Bharadwaja, निलयम् hermitage, प्रापतुः arrived.
2::54::8::रामः Rama, अश्रमम् hermitage, आसाद्य having approached, मृगपक्षिणः animals and birds, त्रासयन् frightening, मुहूर्तम् for a moment, अध्वानम् on the path, गत्वा proceeding, भरद्वाजम् Bharadhwaja, उपागमत् reached.
2::54::9::ततः then, सीतया by Sita, अनुगतौ followed, वीरौ those two heroes, आश्रमम् hermitage, आसाद्य having reached, मुनेः ascetic's, दर्शनकाङ्क्षिणौ wishing to see, दूरादेव at a distance, अवतस्थतुः stood.
2::54::10::सः रामः Rama, प्रविश्य having entered, संशितव्रतम् one practising rigorous austerities, एकाग्रम् with concentration of mind, तपसा with asceticism, लब्दचक्षुषम् one who has obtained spiritual insight, हुताग्निहोत्रम् one who has kindled fire in sacrificial rituals, महाभागम् distinguished, शिष्यगणैः with disciples, वृतम् surrounded by, महात्मानम् highsouled, ऋषिम् sage, दृष्ट्वैव having seen, सौमित्रिणा Lakshmana, सार्धम् along with, सीतया च Sita too, अभ्यवादयत् paid obeisance. 
2::54::11::लक्ष्मणपूर्वजः Lakshmana's elder brother (Rama), तस्मै to that sage, आत्मानम् himself, न्यवेदयत introduced, भगवन् O venerable one, अवाम् both of us, दशरथस्य Dasaratha's, पुत्रौ sons, रामलक्ष्मणौ Rama and Lakshmana.
2::54::12::इयम् this, कल्याणी auspicious one, मम my, भार्या consort, जनकात्मजा daughter of Janaka, वैदेही Vaidehi (Sita), अनिन्दिता irreproachable, माम् me, विजनम् desolate, तपोवनम् penacegrove, अनुयाता has followed.
2::54::13::दृढव्रतः of firm resolve, भ्राता brother, अनुजः younger, प्रियः dear, अयं सौमित्रिः this son of Sumitra, पित्रा by father, प्रव्राज्यमानम् being sent on exile, माम् me, वनमेव to the forest, अन्वगमत् followed. 
2::54::14::भगवन् O venerable one, पित्रा by father, नियुक्ताः ordered by, तपोवनम् penancegrove प्रवेक्ष्यामः we will enter, तत्र there, मूलफलाशनाः subsisting on roots and fruits, धर्ममेव following righteous ways, चरिष्यामः will practise.
2::54::15::धर्मात्मा sage Bharadwaja, धीमतः of the sagacious, तस्य that, राजपुत्रस्य prince's,  तत् वचनम् those words, श्रुत्वा having heard, ततः then, गाम् bull, अर्घ्यम् for arghya, उदकम् water, उपानयत brought.
2::54::16::तप्ततपाः one who practised severe penance, नानाविधान् different kinds of, वन्यमूलफलाश्रयान् made from the fruits and roots, अन्नरसान् food and drink, तेभ्यः for them, ददौ gave, वासं चैव restingplace also, अकल्पयत् arranged. 
2::54::17::मृगपक्षिभिः by animals and birds, मुनिभिश्च by hermits also, समन्ततः surrounded, आसीनः seated, मुनिः sage (Bharadwaja), आगतम् arrived, तं रामम् to that Rama, स्वागतेन with  welcome, अभ्यर्च्य having paid homage, आह uttered.
2::54::18::सः भरद्वाजः that Bharadwaja, तदा then, ताम् that, अर्चाम् hospitality, प्रतिगृह्य having  received, उपविष्टम् seated in front, राघवम् to Rama, धर्मयुक्तम् in conformity with  righteousness, इदं वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::54::19::काकुत्स्थ O descendant of the Kakutstha dynasty, चिरस्य after a long time, इह here, आगतम् arrived here, त्वाम् you, पश्यामि खलु I see indeed, अकारणम् without any reason, तव your, इदम् this, विवासनम् banishment, मया by me, श्रुतं च is heard too.
2::54::20::महानद्योः of two great rivers, समागमे at the confluence, अयम् this, अवकाशः region, विविक्तः solitary, पुण्यश्च is also sacred, रमणीयश्च pleasant, भवान् you, इह here, सुखम् comfortably, वसतु can dwell.
2::54::21::सर्वहिते for the wellbeing of all, रतः devoted, राघवः born in the dynasty of Raghu, रामः Rama, भरद्वाजेन by Bharadwaja, एवम् in this way, वचनम् these words, उक्तः having been addressed, शुभम् auspicious, वाक्यम् words, प्रत्युवाच spoke in reply.
2::54::22::भगवन् O venerable one, इतः from here, पौरजानपदः inhabiting towns and villages, जनः subjects, आसन्नः living closely, इह here, माम् me, सुदर्शम् easily to be seen, प्रेक्ष्य having seen, जनः people, वैदेहीम् Sita, मां चापि me too, प्रेक्षकः in order to see, इमम् आश्रमम् to this hermitage, आगमिष्यति will frequent, अहम् I, मन्ये think so, अनेन कारणेन for this reason, अहम् I, इह here, वासम् to reside, न रोचये do not desire.
2::54::23::भगवन् revered one, सुखार्हा deserves comfort, जनकात्मजा Janaka's daughter, वैदेही Vaidehi, यत्र where, रमेत may enjoy, एकान्ते in a solitary, उत्तमम् agreeable, आश्रमस्थानम् hermitage, पश्य see.
2::54::24::महामुनिः great sage, भरद्वाजः Bharadwaja, राघवस्य Rama's, एतत् these, शुभम् auspicious, वाक्यम् words, श्रुत्वा having heard, ततः after that, अर्थग्राहकम् conveying the meaning, वाक्यम् words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::54::25::तात O dear, महर्षिसेवितः inhabited by sages, पुण्यः sacred, सर्वतः from all sides, सुखदर्शनः whose sight causes delight, गोलाङ्गूलानुचरितः full of wandering apes, वानरर्क्षनिषेवितः inhabited by monkeys and bears, चित्रकूटः इति by name Chitrakuta, ख्यातः wellknown, गन्धमादनसन्निभः like 'Gandhamadana' mountain, गिरिः mountain, इतः from here, दशक्रोशे at a distance of ten krosas, यत्र there, निवत्स्यसि you can live.
2::54::26::नरः a man, यावता as long as, चित्रकूटस्य Chitrakuta mountain's, शृङ्गानि peaks, आवेक्षते beholds, कल्याणानि auspicious deeds, समाधत्ते will perform, पापे in sinful thoughts, मनः the mind, न कुरुते will not employ.
2::54::27::तत्र there, बहवः many, ऋषयः ascetics, शरदां शतम् for hundreds of years, तपसा with austerities, विहृत्य having roamed about, कपालशिरसा सह with the skulls on their heads, दिवम् heaven, आरूढाः have ascended.
2::54::28::राम Rama, प्रविविक्तम् solitary, तं वासम् that abode, भवतः for your, सुखम् happiness, अहम् I,  मन्ये think, मया सह with me, इह वा or here, वनवासाय for the period of banishment, वस you may live.
2::54::29::धर्मवित् one who knows his duty, सः भरद्वाजः that Bharadwaja, सभार्यम् with his consort, भ्रात्रा सह with brother, च and, प्रियातिथिम् beloved guest, तं रामम् that Rama, सर्वकामैः with all desires, प्रतिजग्राह honoured. 
2::54::30::प्रयागे at Prayaga, तं महर्षिम् that great sage, उपेयुषः sitting near, रामस्य of Rama, चित्राः interesting, कथाः tales, कथयतः while conversing, पुण्या that holy, रजनी night, प्रपन्ना had set in. 
2::54::31::सुखोचितः used to comforts, परिश्रान्तः exhausted, सीतांतृतीयः Sita counted as the third, काकुत्स्थ: Rama, रम्ये in the lovely, भरद्वाजाश्रमे hermitage of Bharadwaja, तां रात्रिम् that night, सुखम् happily, अवसत् stayed.
2::54::32::नरशार्दूलः tiger (best) among men, रजन्याम् after the night, प्रभातायाम् at dawn, भरद्वाजम् to Bharadwaja, उपागमत् approached, ज्वलिततेजसम् with blazing lustre, मुनिम् the sage, उवाच said.
2::54::33::सत्यशील O truthful, भगवन् O venerable, इह here, तव आश्रमे in your hermitage, शर्वरीम् the night, उषिता स्म we have spent, अद्य to day, नः us, भवान् you, वसतिम् dwellingplace, अनुजानातु permit.
2::54::34::तस्याम् रात्र्याम् when that night, व्युष्टायाम् had come to a close, भरद्वाजः Bharadwaja, मधुमूलफलोपेतम् abounding in honey, roots, and fruits, चित्रकूटम् to Chitrakuta, व्रज go, इति thus, इदम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::54::35::महाबल O mighty one, राम Rama, तव your, औपयिकम् right, वासम् place for your stay, मन्ये I think, नानानगगणोपेतः full of various types of trees, किन्नरोरगसेवितः inhabited by kinneras, serpents, मयूरनादाभिरुतः echoing with cries of peacocks, गजराजनिषेवितः frequented by mighty tuskers, पुण्यश्च sacred, रमणीयश्च delightful, बहुमूलफलायुतः abounding in many roots and fruits, विश्रुतः wellknown, सः that, चित्रकूटः Chitrakuta, शैलः mountain, भवता by you, गम्यताम् go.
2::54::36::राघव Rama, तत्र there, अस्मिन् वनान्ते in the middle of the forest, अभितः throughout, कुञ्जरयूथानि herds of elephants, मृगयूथानि च and herds of deer, विचरन्ति range about, तानि all that, द्रक्षयसि you will see.
2::54::37::सीतया सार्धम् along with Sita, सरित्प्रस्रवणप्रस्थान् rivers, waterfalls, plateaus, दरीकन्दरनिर्झरान्  caverns and mountaintorrents, चरतः while wandering, तव your, मनः mind, नन्दिष्यति will be joyful.
2::54::38::प्रहृष्टकोयष्टिककोकिलस्वनैः with the notes of cheerful lapwings and cuckoos, विनादितम् echoed, बहुभिः by many, मृगैश्च deer (animals), मत्तै: intoxicated, कुञ्जरैश्च by elephants, सुरम्यम् exceedingly charming, तं वसुधाधरम् that mount Chitrakuta, आसाद्य having reached, आश्रमम् hermitage, समावस dwell there.
