2::88::1::After listening to all that Guha had said, Bharatha reached the foot of the ingudi tree accompanied by his ministers and gazing at Rama's bed, said to all his mothers the magnanimous Rama rested that night here on this ground in that crushed bed.
2::88::2::After listening to all that Guha had said, Bharatha reached the foot of the ingudi tree accompanied by his ministers and gazing at Rama's bed, said to all his mothers the magnanimous Rama rested that night here on this ground in that crushed bed.
2::88::3::Rama, son of highly fortunate and sagacious Dasaratha, born of a noble lineage does not deserve to rest on this naked earth.
2::88::4::How could Rama, the best among men used to a bed made of a pile of excellent spreads and overspread with deer skin, sleep on the bare ground?
2::88::5::Rama, scorcher of enemies, one who was accostomed to dwell in the attic of sevenstoreyed mansions with floors paved with gold, and silver, spread with excellent carpets, decked with bouquets of flowers and perfumed with sandal and agaru. The peaks of those palaces were bright like towering white clouds and echoed with cries of  parrots. They were cool and fragrant with perfumes. The marvellous palaces made of golden walls are comparable to mount Meru. He used to wake up to the sounds of songs and musical instruments, the tinkling of finest ornaments and the splendid sounds of the drums. Many bards, genealogists and panegyrists singing befitting ballads and extolling his virtues at appropriate time used to salute him in reverence (Bharata lamented). 
2::88::6::It is unbelievable that such a thing has happened to Rama in this world. It does not seem real to me and looks appears like a dream and my mind is bewildered.
2::88::7::Dasaratha's son, Rama had to rest on the ground would admittedly mean that no divine power is mightier than Time (Destiny).
2::88::8::Sita, daughter of Janaka, king of Videha, and beloved daughterinlaw of Dasaratha who caused delight to the beholder, too had to rest on the bare ground.
2::88::9:: This is my brother's couch and it is here where he had tossed about. The grass spread on this hard surface is crushed by his limbs.
2::88::10::Some particles of gold dust are seen stuck to this bed here and there. I think Sita might have rested on this excellent bed with all her jewellery.
2::88::11::That the upper garment of Sita might have been caught here is well evident from the shining silken threads stuck.
2::88::12::Hapless Sita is young and delicate. Being a chaste lady, she, even in these (adverse) circumstances, does not feel the brunt. Hence, maybe she thinks her husbands' (hard) bed comfortable to her. 
2::88::13::Alas, what suffering Because of a cruel man like me Rama along with his spouse was condemned to recline upon such bed like an orphan.
2::88::14::How could such Rama sleep on the ground? He was born in the house of emperors, worthy of reverence by the entire world and beloved of all the worlds, with the complexion of a blue lotus, with red eyes, and pleasing looks, one who deserves to be happy and not to suffer by renouncing the kingdom and excellent comforts.
2::88::15::Surely Lakshmana of great merit and auspicious virtues is fortunate since he is accompanying his brother Rama in times of adversity.
2::88::16::Sita has, indeed, accomplished her object by accompanying her husband (to the forest). Bereft of that magnanimous Rama, all of us are in doubt (if he will accept our services).
2::88::17::King Dasaratha having ascended to heaven and Rama taken shelter in the forest, this kingdom appears to me like a ship without a helmsman.
2::88::18::No one, even in thought, would ever desire this kingdom, protected by the strength of his arms even while residing in the forest.
2::88::19::Now the gates of our capital city (Ayodhya) are wide open. The city is unprotected and endangered. There are no guards to keep vigil over the ramparts. The horses and elephants are not in control (hence unprepared for battle). The army is unhappy and demoralised. At this state even the enemies will not like to seize the city, they will shun it like food mixed with poison.
2::88::20::From today onwards, wearing matted hair and clad in robes made of bark and living on fruits and roots, I too shall sleep on the naked ground or on grass. 
2::88::21::Taking upon myself the vow of Rama, I too shall live in the forest cheerfully for the rest of the term on behalf of him so that his vow shall not prove untrue.
2::88::22::As I live in the forest on behalf of my brother Rama, Satrughna will live with me. My esteemed brother Rama will rule Ayodhya along with Lakshmana. 
2::88::23::In Ayodhya the brahmins shall coronate Rama. Will the gods make this desire of mine true? 
2::88::24::I will seek his grace in many ways by bowing down my head. Even then if Rama does not grant my wish, I shall also live with him as long as it takes. He will not be able to ignore a forester like me.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टाशीतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eightyeigth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
