2::91::1:: With the decision of Bharata, son of Kaikeyi, to stay there for the night, sage Bharadwaja extended to him all hospitality.
2::91::2::Bharata said to Bharadwaja, You have already extended the hospitality in offering water for washing the feet with and of arghya befitting a guest as available in the forest.
2::91::3::Bharadwaja then said to Bharata with a gentle smile, I know you are full of love and content with whatever is offered you.
2::91::4::O Bharata, the best of men, I want to treat your army with food. This will please me and I hope you will act accordingly.
2::91::5::Why did you, O Bharata, the best of men, station your army at a distance before coming here? Could you not approach me along with your army?
2::91::6::With folded palms (in reverence), Bharata said to sage Bharadwaja whose penance was his wealth: I did not approach you with the army for fear of you, O venerable one.
2::91::7::O venerable one a king or a prince ought to intentionally avoid those places occupied by ascetics.
2::91::8::O venerable sage spirited horses, men and mighty rutting elephants follow me covering a wide expanse of land.
2::91::9::Lest the army should damage the huts, trees, land, and defile the water in the ashram, I came here alone.
2::91::10::Thus commanded the great ascetic, 'Let the army be brought here'. Accordingly, Bharata ordered the army to come.
2::91::11::Then Bharadwaja entered the fire sanctuary, sipped water and washed his hands with water and invoked Visvakarma to provide hospitality.
2::91::12::I intend to provide hospitality for which I am invoking Visvakarma and Tvastara who builds houses. Let adequate arrangements be made.
2::91::13::I invoke the three deities, guardians of the four quarters headed by Indra to extend hospitality (to Bharata). Let them make adequate arrangements in this regard.
2::91::14::Let the rivers flowing towards the east, and the west, flowing on the earth and in the sky, flowing everywhere reach here and now. 
2::91::15::Let some rivers flow with liquor made of datepalms, some with wellprepared wine and some with cool water which tastes like sugarcane juice.
2::91::16::I invoke the gandharvas, Visvavasu, Ha Ha and Hu Hu, and also goddesses like gandharvas (heavenly musicians) and apsaras (nymphs) from all regions.
2::91::17::I summon also Grutachi, Visvachi, Misrakesi, Alambusa, Nagadantha, Hema and Hima whose abode is on the mountain.
2::91::18::I invoke all the women who attend on Indra and Bramha along with tumbur with all their (musical) instruments.
2::91::19::Let Kubera's divine forest situated in the land of Kurus, where leaves serve as raiment and ornaments and celestial women as its fruits come here.
2::91::20::Let the blessed Moon furnish me with excellent food of every kind -- solid, liquid, soft and those which are to be sucked and licked in great variety and quantity. 
2::91::21::Let her furnish me with manycoloured garlands of fresh flowers from trees, wines and other drinks and meat of different kinds.
2::91::22::The valiant ascetic of incomparable lustre and power of penance in profound meditation said this in an accent in conformity with Vedic instruction.
2::91::23::As Bharadwaja with folded palms was thus meditating with his face turned eastward, all the deities appeared there one by one.
2::91::24::Meanwhile, soft auspicious and pleasant breeze passing over Malaya and Dardura mountains, comforting and cooling the sweat, began to blow.
2::91::25::Then divine clouds rolled in and showered celestial flowers. The sounds of heavenly gongs could be heard in every direction.
2::91::26::Gentle breeze began to blow. Troops of apsaras danced. Gandharvas and gods sang and the lyres rang.
2::91::27::That soft, melodious, rhythmic and wellmodulated sound entered the heaven and earth as well as the ears of all living beings.
2::91::28::When the celestial sounds pleasing to the ears of men had subsided, the army of Bharata beheld the wonderful creations of Visvakarma.
2::91::29::The ground was levelled on every side for five yojanas and covered with several grass lawns resembling lapis lazuli (blue sapphire) and cat's eye.
2::91::30::There the best of fruitbearing trees like bilva trees, woodapple trees, citrons, emblic myrobalan trees and mango trees laden with fruits sprang up.
2::91::31::From the forests of the northern Kuru kingdom, with all delights of heaven, a divine river with innumerable trees that grow on river banks came into existence.
2::91::32::Bright quadrangles, stables for elephants and horses, auspicious arch ways for palaces and mansions sprang up.
2::91::33::An auspicious royal palace with splendid archs resembling white clouds sprang up. It was sprinkled with celestial perfumes and adorned with beautiful garlands. That royal palace forming a quadrangle was furnished with couches, seats and carriages and furnished with celestial drinks of every kind, delicious food and splendid garments. It was stocked with food of every variety in clean and spotless vessels. Seats for every one and magnificent couches covered with excellent bedstead were arranged.
2::91::34::Longarmed Bharata, son of Kaikeyi entered that palace full of jewels with the permission of the great sage.
2::91::35::All the ministers, priests followed him and were glad to see the arrangement in that mansion. 
2::91::36::There where stood an exquisite throne, a fan and a parasol Bharata stayed in the company of ministers. 
2::91::37::He bowed in reverence and worshipped the throne (as though Rama were seated there). Taking hold of a fan made of yak's tail he sat in a minister's seat.
2::91::38::First the ministers and priests took their respective seats in accordance with their rank, and then the army chief and finally the supervisor of the camp.
2::91::39::Rivers filled with payasam (rice cooked in milk and sugar) in the shape of mud flowed towards Bharata at the command of Bharadwaja.
2::91::40::On both the banks of those rivers, charming, celestial houses plastered with white clay appeared by the grace of Brahma.
2::91::41::At that very moment twenty thousand women adorned with beautiful ornaments sent by Brahma presented themselves.
2::91::42::Twenty thousand women adorned with gold, gems and corals sent by Kubera came.
2::91::43::Troops of twenty thousand apsaras by whom any man when taken hold of in their arms could be intoxicated with intense passion, came from Nandana gardens.
2::91::44::There along with Narada, Tumburu and Gopa, distinguished kings of the gandharvas, looking bright like the Sun, began to sing in the presence of Bharata.
2::91::45::Thereafter, the apsaras, Alambusa, Misrakesi, Pundarika and Vamana danced near Bharata at the command of Bharadwaja.
2::91::46::The garlands of the gods available in Chitraratha's (Kubera's) garden could not match those obtained under the orders of Bharadwaja. 
2::91::47::At the command of Bharadwaja, bilva trees acted as drummers, vibhitaka trees as cymbalists and the pipal trees as dancers.
2::91::48::Thereafter pine, palmyra, tilaka, and naktamala trees were transformed into hunchbacks and dwarfs and moved about in great delight.
2::91::49::Asohka, emblic myrobalan and all other trees found in the forest malati, mallika and jati creepers assumed the form of women, came over to the hermitage of Bharadwaja and said:
2::91::50::'O wine drinkers, drink as much as you can those who are hungry partake payasam and sacred meat'.
2::91::51::Every single warrior was attended by seven or eight women who applied oil and massaged his body and bathed him on the lovely banks of the river.
2::91::52::Some women with beautiful eyes quickly approached them for massaging. The  best of ladies wiped their bodies dry and gave each other wine to drink.
2::91::53::The attendants of draughtanimals fed the horses, elephants, donkeys, camels and oxen their appropriate food.
2::91::54::The draughtaimals of the illustrious warriors of Ikshvaku kings were urged by the highly energetic attendants to eat more and more of parched grain mixed with sugarcane and honey.
2::91::55::The horserider no longer recognised the horse or the mahout the elephant and the whole army was inebriated with drinking and pleasure.
2::91::56::All the armymen with their desires gratified and anointing their bodies with red sandal paste surrounded by apsaras exclaimed.
2::91::57::We will neither return to Ayodhya, nor enter Dandaka (forest). May Bharata and Rama be happy.
2::91::58::Having enjoyed the hospitality of Bharadwaja the foot soldiers, horse and elephant riders made utterances ignoring their leaders.
2::91::59::The exceedingly delighted soldiers of Bharata's retinue in their thousands cried out with excitement This is the very heaven. 
2::91::60::Those thousands of soldiers wearing flower garlands ran about dancing, singing, and laughing.
2::91::61::Glancing at the ambrosial food, a desire arose in the minds of those soldiers to eat once again although they had already partaken it.
2::91::62::Messengers, maidservants, female attendants, and soldiers -- all of them in their thousands dressed in fresh garments felt exceedingly proud of themselves.
2::91::63::There the elephants, donkeys and camels, cows and horses and also beasts and birds were wellnourished. No one troubled the other.
2::91::64::In that army there was none who could be seen without wearing garments of sparkling white, who was hungry or dirty or with decayed hair.
2::91::65::There the soldiers beheld in amazement thousands of iron containers decked with flags and flowers and filled with white rice, mutton, pork, choicest condiments, fruit juice, fragrant and tasty soup.
2::91::66::Along the edge of the forest, wells were filled with thick payasam. There were wishfulfilling cows and honeydripping trees.
2::91::67::The wells were found filled with datepalm liquor and surrounded by pots of well cooked meat of peacocks, chicken and other animals.
2::91::68::There were thousands of pots, lakhs of plates, crores of vessels -- all made of gold and filled with wellgarnished food. Curd was kept in earthern pots like jugs and jars and pots with a wide mouth. Tanks were formed, some filled with white curd of good flavour and of the colour of woodapple, some with white curd blended with spices and some with payasam and heaps of barely powder mixed with sugar.
2::91::69::The soldiers saw on the river banks at landing places levigated powder, fragrant powder and extracts and other bathing requisites of different kinds stored in receptacles.
2::91::70::There the soldiers beheld on every side stacks of toothbrushing sticks, white and bristled, white lumps of sandal paste placed in dishes made of leaves, well cleaned mirrors, collection of clothes, several pairs of footwear, collyrium boxes, combs, brushes for cleaning moustaches, weapons, parasoles, bows and shining armour, different kinds of couches, and seats. There were pools of drinking water for donkeys, camels, elephants and horses and excellent landing places filled with flowering lotuses and water lilies. The lakes were of transparent waters resembling the hue of the sky easy and comfortable for swimming. There they saw heaps of soft grass as green as sapphire and kadamva trees for animals to refresh themselves under.
2::91::71::The men were amazed when they beheld the wonderful hospitality extended by maharshi Bharadwaja to Bharata, as if all this happened in a dream world. 
2::91::72::As they were enjoying themselves in Bharadwaja's hermitage like the gods in the garden of Indra the night wore off.
2::91::73::Those rivers, the gandharvas and all those lovely women took leave of sage Bharadwaja and returned to where they had come from.
2::91::74::Even after the departure of the gandharvas the soldiers who had consumed limitless liquor were still inebriated. The divine agaru and sandalwood smeared on their bodies still remained. Several splendid garlands crushed by them were strewn all over.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्य अयोध्याकाण्डे एकनवतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the ninetyfirst sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
