2::43::1::ततः then, पुत्रशोकार्ता struck by grief on account of her son's departure, कौशल्या  Kausalya, शयने on the couch, शोकेन due to grief, सन्नम् exhausted, पार्थिवम् king, समीक्ष्य having gazed, तं महीपतिम् to that lord of the world, Dasaratha, उवाच said.
2::43::2::अहिजह्मगा moving obliquely like a serpent, कैकेयी Kaikeyi, नरशार्दूले tiger (best) among men, राघवे in Rama, विषम् venom, उप्त्वा having sown out, निर्मुक्ता casting off the slough, पन्नगी इव like a sheserpent, विचरिष्यति will wander about. 
2::43::3::सुभगा happly, (Kaikeyi), रामम् Rama, विवास्य having banished, लब्दकामा having satisfied her desires, भूयः again, वेश्मनि in the house, दुष्टाहिरिव like a vicious serpent, माम् me, समाहिता accomplished, त्रासयिष्यति will torture me.
2::43::4::मम my, आत्मजम् son, दासम् as slave, दातुम् अपि even to give, वरम् is better, अथ  thereafter, रामः Rama, कामकारः discharging the duties, नगरे in the city (Ayodhya), भैक्षम् food obtained by begging, चरन् moving about, गृहे in the house, वसेत् would have lived.
2::43::5::कैकेय्या of Kaikeyi, यथेष्टतः according to her whim, रामम् to Rama, स्थानात् from his place, पातयित्वा having thrown down, अहिताग्निना by the sacrificers, पर्वणि on the new moon days, रक्षसाम् to rakshasas, भागः इव like the share, प्रदिष्टः is given.
2::43::6::गजराजगतिः having the gait of the king of the elephants, वीरः hero, महाबाहुः mightyarmed,  धनुर्धरः archer Rama, सभार्यः with wife, सहलक्ष्मणः with Lakshmana, नूनम् surely, वनम् forest, आविशते is entering.
2::43::7::अदृष्टदुःखानाम् who have never seen suffering, कैकेय्याः Kaikeyi's, अनुमते her desire, त्वया by you, वनवासाय to dwell in the forest, त्यक्तानाम् have been abandoned, वने in the  forest, का नु what, अवस्था भविष्यति will be their state.
2::43::8::रत्नहीनाः deprived of best of things, फलकाले at the time of fruition (enjoyment), विवासिताः having been exiled, तरुणाः young people, ते they, कृपणाः living in misery, फलमूलैः fruits and roots, कृताशनाः for food, कथम् how, वत्स्यन्ति will they live?
2::43::9::यत् when, सभार्यम् with wife, राघवम् Rama, सह भ्रात्रा with Lakshmana, इह here, पश्येयम् I shall see, शोकक्षयः annhilation of sorrow, शिवः auspcious, सः कालः that time, इदानीम्  now, मम to me, अपि स्यात् will it come?
2::43::10::वीरौ the two heroes, उपस्थितौ having returned, श्रुत्वैव hearing, यशस्विनी famous, अयोध्या Ayodhya, हृष्टजना with cheerful people, सूच्छ्रितध्वजमालिनी uplifted flags, कदा when?, भविष्यति will it be?
2::43::11::अरण्यात् from the forest, पुनः again, आगतौ having come back, नरव्याघ्रौ tigers (best) among men, Rama and Lakshmana, प्रेक्ष्य having seen, पुरी the city of Ayodhya, पर्वणि on a fullmoon day, समुद्र इव like the sea, हृष्टा overflow (overjoyed), कदा when, नन्दिष्यति will it rejoice?
2::43::12::महाबाहुः mightyarmed, वीरः hero, वृषभः bull, गोवधूमिव like cow, सीताम् Sita, रथे on the chariot, पुरस्कृत्य placing in front, अयोध्यां पुरीम् to the city of Ayodhya, कदा when, प्रवेक्ष्यति will enter?
2::43::13::प्रविशन्तौ when they enter, अरिन्दमौ subduers of enemies, मम my, आत्मजौ sons, राजमार्गे on the highway, प्राणिसहस्राणि thousands of people, लाजैः with parched grain, कदा when, अवकिरिष्यन्ति shower.
2::43::14::अयोध्याम् of Ayodhya, प्रविशन्तौ when they enter, शुभकुण्डलौ wearing auspicious earrings, उदग्रायुधनिस्त्रिंशौ with powerful weapons and swords raised high, सश्रृङ्गौ with peaks, पर्वताविव like mountains, कदा when, द्रक्ष्यामि shall I see?
2::43::15::हृष्टाः delighted, कन्याद्विजातीनाम् to young girls and to brahmins, सुमनसः flowers, फलानि च fruits also, प्रदिशन्तः while offering, कदा when, पुरीम् the city, प्रदक्षिणम् circling, करिष्यन्ति will do? 
2::43::16::अमरप्रभः possessing the lustre of gods, धर्मज्ञः knower of righteousness (Rama), बुद्ध्या in wisdom, वयसा च in age, परिणतः fully mature, त्रिवर्षः इव like a three year old boy, ललन् playfully, माम् me, कदा when, अभ्युपैष्यति will he reach?
2::43::17::वीर O valiant one, कदर्यया out of avarice, मया by myself, निस्संशयम् undoubtedly, पुरा formerly, वत्सेषु calves, पातुकामेषु thirsting for milk, मातृ़णाम् of mothers, स्तनाः udders, शातिताः hacked by me.
2::43::18::पुरुषव्य्राघ्र O tiger among men, बालवत्सा young calf, गौरिव like cow, वत्सला having affection in the calf, सा अहम् I, कैकेय्या by Kaikeyi, सिंहेन by lion, गौरिव like cow, बलात् forcibly, विवत्सा separated from the calf, कृता is rendered.
2::43::19::एकपुत्रा having only one son, अहम् I, तावद्गुणैः with such virtue, जुष्टम् endowed with, सर्वशास्त्रविशारदम् adept in all shastras, पुत्रं विना without my son, जीवितुम् to live, न उत्सहे हि I do not desire. 
2::43::20::महाबाहुम् mightyarmed, महाबलम् immensely strong, प्रियं पुत्रम् beloved son, अपश्यन्त्या: without seeing him, मे for me, इह in this world, जीविते in this life,  किञ्चित् little, सामर्थ्यम् ability, न कल्प्यते हि is not provided. 
2::43::21::तनूजशोकप्रभवः born out of the grief of separation from my son, अयम् this, हुताशनः fire, समुत्थितः having arisen, निदाघे in summer, उद्धतप्रभः immense heat, भगवान्  divine, दिवाकरः Sun, रश्मिभिः with his rays, इमाम् this, महीं यथा like earth, माम् me, दीपयते is burning.
