2::21::1::While Rama's mother, Kausalya was lamenting, miserable Lakshmana said to her these words appropriate to the occasion:
2::21::2::O venerable one, I do not like that Rama should go to the forest yielding to the words of a woman and renouncing the welfare of the kingdom.
2::21::3:: The king  has a perverse nature. He is aged. He is overpowered by passions. He is under the spell of carnal pleasures and is incited (by Kaikeyi). Such a man can speak anything.
2::21::4::I do not see any fault in Rama nor any offence committed by him for which he is exiled from the kingdom. 
2::21::5:: I do not find anybody in this world, even an adversary or one defeated, who finds fault with him even in his absence. 
2::21::6:: With no cause nor concern for righteousness, will any one abandon his son who is nearly equal to god, upright, selfrestrained and loved even by his enemies ?
2::21::7::Will any son with the ideals of a king in mind accept such words of this king who has entered his chilhood again ?  
2::21::8::Before this news is known to any one bring the kingdom under your control with my assistance.
2::21::9::O Rama who can commit excesses on you, when you stand like  Yama, god of death, protected by me with my bow?  
2::21::10:: O best of men, if the whole of Ayodhya stands against you I shall depopulate it with my sharp arrows.
2::21::11::I shall slay all of them who support Bharata and those who seek his prosperity. A gentleman is treated with disgrace indeed.
2::21::12:: Even if our father instigated by Kaikeyi becomes our enemy, he shall be imprisoned or even slain regardless of our relationship with him.
2::21::13::Even a preceptor who follows the unrighteous path and is filled with haughtiness and does not know how to discriminate between good and bad, deserves to be disciplined (punished).
2::21::14:: O best of men, under what authority or reason this king wants to confer on Kaikeyi the kingdom  that rightfully belongs to you?
2::21::15::What authority, O Rama, chastiser of foes, this king has to bestow the kingdom upon Bharata by entering into undesirable hostility towards you and me?
2::21::16::O mother, (Lakshmana now tells Kausalya) I am truly loyal to my brother from the bottom of my heart. I swear this by my bow, on my merits earned through charity, by my truthfulness and by the good deeds I have done.
2::21::17::O mother rest assured should Rama enter a blazing fire or a forest I must have already entered it.
2::21::18::Like the rising Sun dispelling darkness, I shall eliminate your sorrow. O mother Let Rama see my valour. You, too.
2::21::19::Having heard the words of the magnanimous Lakshmana, Kausalya, depressed and weeping, said to Rama: 
2::21::20:: O my son you have heard what your brother Lakshmana said and if it pleases you, do later what is to be done.  
2::21::21::By heeding the unrighteous words of my cowife (Kaikeyi) it does not behove you to leave me griefstricken and go away from here.
2::21::22::You are righteous. You know your duty. If you wish to follow the path of righteousness, stay here, serve me and follow the best of dharma.
2::21::23:: O son Kasyapa who led a life of selfdiscipline and served his mother at home, attained heaven credited with (the merit of) the highest penance. 
2::21::24::Just as the king is worthy of your respectful homage, so am I. I will not permit you to go from here to the forest.
2::21::25:: Separated from you, I have no use of this life or happiness. I prefer to live with you even if it means eating grass.
2::21::26::If you depart for the forest leaving me griefstricken I cannot live. Here I shall seek death by fasting.
2::21::27::O son you will then fall into hell. As wellknown in the world, the ocean, the lord of rivers, incurred the guilt of slaying a brahmin through unrighteous conduct.
2::21::28::Thereafter, virtuous Rama addressed these words consistent with righteousness to his miserable mother Kausalya who was thus lamenting:
2::21::29::I do not have the power to transgress the orders of my father. Bowing my head I beseech you,  allow me to go to the forest.
2::21::30::Learned sage Kandu who knew what is righteousness and a strict observant of vows, slew a cow for carrying out the command of his father. 
2::21::31::Earlier the sons of Sagara, born in our family, while excavating the earth by the order of their father met a terrible death.     
2::21::32::Parasurama, son of Jamadagni himself in obedience to the words of his father, decapitated his mother Renuka in the forest with an axe.
2::21::33:: All of them including many other godlike persons, O Mother fulfilled the words of their father. I shall also make my father's wish come true.  
2::21::34::I am not O Devi the only one obeying my father's command. All I have mentioned to you did.
2::21::35:: I am not advancing anything new, contrary to the existing practice. I am only following the trodden path of our ancestors.
2::21::36::I will not do as duty anything contrary to what is done by others in this world. No one who obeys the commands of his father falls off the path of righteousness. 
2::21::37::One who is the best among the knowers of speech and best of all archers, Rama spoke to his mother in this manner and then said to Lakshmana:
2::21::38:: I know, O Lakshmana, your profound affection for me. I also know your valour,  strength and unassailable energy.
2::21::39:: O Lakshamana of auspicious qualities, since my mother is not aware of the significance of truth and selfrestraint, she is overcome with grief, great and incomparable.
2::21::40::Righteousness alone is supreme in this world and truth is established in righteousness. This excellent command of our father is supported by righteousness.
2::21::41::Any one, O hero, who has taken recourse to righteousness should not  allow the promise made to his father,  mother or a brahmin to go in vain. 
2::21::42::O hero I cannot transgress the command of my father since at his instance only Kaikeyi urged me (to go to the forest).
2::21::43:: Therefore, leave this ignoble thought, resort to the duty of a kshatriya, take the righteous path. Do not adopt violence. Follow my decision.
2::21::44::Speaking affectionately to his brother Lakshmana, Rama with folded hands and head bowed  again addressed Kausalya: 
2::21::45::I have decided, O mother to go to the forest from here. Grant me the permission to do so. I swear on my life. Perform all the ceremonies for securing prosperity for me.
2::21::46::Like rajarshi Yayati of yore who lost heaven and rejained it, I shall return from the forest to the city (of Ayodhya) after the vow is fulfilled.
2::21::47::Do not grieve, O mother Be prudent enough to subdue your sorrow in your heart. Having fulfilled father's words, I shall come back from my sojourn in the forest.
2::21::48:: You, Sita, Lakshmana, Sumitra and I -- all of us shall abide by the words of my father. This indeed is eternal law.
2::21::49:: O mother in withdrawing the articles (for consecration) and also in subduing the sorrow in your heart approve of my plan to dwell in the forest. 
2::21::50:: Having heard these words so unruffled and tranquil which conformed to  righteousness, mother (Kausalya), like a dead person regaining consciousness spoke to Rama again:
2::21::51::By virtue of my own duty and affection towards you, O my son I am as much your preceptor as your father is. I will not grant you permission. You should not go, leaving me deeply distressed.
2::21::52::What is the purpose of my life in this world without you? What purpose do I have with  the other world or with the oblations (offered to manes) or with nectar (availble to the gods). I would prefer one moment in your company to the whole world of living beings (without you).
2::21::53::At the (inconsolable) lamentations of his mother, Rama was in flames (within) like a mighty elephant prevented from entering the highway by men with fireworks.
2::21::54::Rama, centred on righteousness, again addressed his mother who had almost  fainted and Lakshmana who was deeply distressed. As his words were consistent with righteousness, he alone was competent to speak that way.
2::21::55:: I know your devotion (to me) and your valour, O Lakshmana But now, without understanding my intention you are causing me and mother severe pain and torment. 
2::21::56::Dharma,artha and kama, O my dear are adjudged in this world according to the fruits of righteous action. All these three are doubtless there (in my decision to go to the forest), like obedience in a wife and love for the mother in good sons. 
2::21::57:: If actions which combine these three (dharma, artha and kama), cannot be performed (which is likely), resort to righteousness. (For) one who seeks wealth is abhorred and one who seeks fulfilment of desires does not attract admiration in this world. 
2::21::58::Whatever a preceptor, an old man, a king and a father commands whether it is out of anger or pleasure or passion must be carried out as dharma. Who will not do it unless he is heartless?
2::21::59::It is impossible for me not to execute the promise completely, O my dear, he (Dasaratha) is our preceptor and, therefore, fit to command us. Even for  mother Kausalya, he is her husband, her refuge and her dharma.
2::21::60:: While the righteous king is living, more importantly treading the righteous path, how can mother Kausalya, like an ordinary widow, accompany me leaving this city? 
2::21::61::Grant me permission O mother, to depart for the forest. Bless me and perform ceremonies for my wellbeing so that I shall return (to the city) after completion (of my exile) like Yayati (who came back to heaven) with the strength of truth. 
2::21::62:: I will not forsake this great glory (of fulfilling my father's promise) for the sake of the kingdom. In this transient existence O mother, I do not wish to acquire this insignificant earth unrighteously.
2::21::63:: Rama, the best among men, thus pacified his mother insisting on his desire to depart for Dandaka forest with courage. And elaborately instructed his brother about his good intentions after which he circumambulated his mother with all his heart.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyfirst sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
