2::54::1::They (Rama, Sita and Lakshmana) spent that auspicious night under that great tree and set out from there after the bright sun rose.
2::54::2::Illustrious Rama, Sita and Lakshmana entered the deep forest and saw the different regions of the land and other enchanting places which they had never seen before and proceeded towards the region where the river Yamuna merged with Bhagirathi Ganga.
2::54::3::Walking on the safe path and observing various kinds of trees Rama said to Lakshmana at the end of the day:
2::54::4::O son of Sumitra, look at the column of smoke rising like the banner of the venerable firegod near Prayaga. I think an ascetic dwells nearby.
2::54::5::We have surely reached the confluence of Ganga and Yamuna which can be ascertained from the sounds of clashing water. 
2::54::6::Here are logs of wood cut into pieces by forestdwellers, living on forest products. You can see various trees near the hermitage of sage Bharadwaja.
2::54::7::The two archers (Rama and Lakshmana) reached comfortably (walking at an easy pace) by evening the hermitage of sage Bharadwaja near the confluence of Ganga and Yamuna.
2::54::8::Seeing Rama approaching the hermitage the deer and the birds were frightened. Proceeding on the path, for a while Rama reached (the place of) Bharadwaja.
2::54::9::Thereafter the two heroes followed by Sita arrived at the hermitage and, wishing to see the sage, waited at a distance.
2::54::10::Rama entered the hermitage and saw that highsouled Bharadwaja surrounded by his disciples. He was a distinguished sage who (himself) kindled sacrficial fires and acquired spiritual insight by practising rigid austerities with concentration of mind and ascetic powers. Rama, Lakshmana and Sita paid their obeisance to that great sage.
2::54::11::Lakshmana's elder brother (Rama) introduced himself (to Bharadwaja), O venerable one, we are both sons of Dasaratha, Rama and Lakshmana. 
2::54::12::This blessed one is my consort, Sita, daughter of Janaka. Irreproachable she has followed me to the desolate grove of penance (hermitage).
2::54::13::This is the son of Sumitra, my beloved younger brother, a man of firm resolve. He has accompanied me when I was sent on exile to the forest by my father.
2::54::14::O venerable one on my father's command we entered the desolate forest of penance. Subsisting on roots and fruits, I shall practise the righteous way of life.
2::54::15::Sage Bharadwaja heard the words of sagacious Rama and offered a bull, water (for washing feet) and arghya (offering to a guest). 
2::54::16::The ascetic who practised severe penance offered them different kinds of food and drink made from roots and fruits available in the forest. He also provided them a place to rest in.
2::54::17::There the sage sat, surrounded by hermits, animals and birds after having welcomed Rama with due honour.
2::54::18::Rama accepted the hospitality of Bharadwaja and took a seat in front of the sage, who spoke to him these words in conformity with righteousness:
2::54::19::O descendant of the Kakutstha dynasty, I am able to see you on your arrival here after a long time. I have also heard about your unwarranted banishment.
2::54::20::This sacred and solitary region near the confluence of two great rivers (Ganga and Yamuna) is a pleasant place. You may stay here comfortably.
2::54::21::Rama, ever devoted to the wellbeing of every one, heard Bharadwaja and replied to him with these auspicious words:
2::54::22::O venerable sage, I feel the people living in nearby villages and towns, perceiving that we can be easily seen here, will frequent this ashram. This is the reason I don't wish to stay here. 
2::54::23::O revered one, Janaka's daughter (Sita) deserves comfort. Suggest a solitary and agreeable place for our hermitage where she can enjoy herself.
2::54::24::On hearing the auspicious words of Rama conveying his intention, the great sage Bharadwaja replied to him thus:
2::54::25::O my son ten krosas (about twenty miles) from here is a mountain wellknown as  Chitrakuta, resembling 'Gandhamadana'. That mountain frequented by maharshis is sacred. It looks pleasant from all sides. Monkeys, apes and bears wander there and it is an appropriate place for you to live in.
2::54::26::As long as one beholds the peaks of mount Chitrakuta, he will be inspired to do good deeds and will not employ his mind in sinful thoughts. 
2::54::27::On the Chitrakuta mountain many ascetics wandered about (lived) for hundreds of years carrying on penance. In the process they became so much emaciated that they looked as if they were left (only) with the skulls on their heads. (In the end) they ascended heaven.
2::54::28::O Rama, I think you will enjoy your stay there in a solitary place. Or else, you may live with me here during the period of banishment.
2::54::29::Bharadwaja, who knows his duty honoured Rama, his beloved guest with his consort and brother by extending all kinds of hospitality.
2::54::30::At Prayaga, while the great sage Bharadwaja was narrating to Rama sitting near him several interesting anecdotes, the holy night set in.
2::54::31::The exhausted scion of the Kakutsthas, used to comforts, stayed in the lovely hermitage of Bharadwaja for the night with Sita, as the third member (of the group).
2::54::32::When the night passed into dawn, Rama the best of men approached the resplendent Bharadwaja and said.
2::54::33::O venerable sage devoted to truth, we have spent the night in your hermitage. Please permit us to depart for the dwellingplace (suggested by you).
2::54::34::When the night came to a close, Bharadwaja said (to Rama): You may proceed to Chitrakuta which abounds in roots, fruits and honey.
2::54::35::O mighty Rama, I think mount Chitrakuta is the right place for you to stay. Go there. That mountain is full of trees of every kind, is inhabited by kinneras and uragas (serpents). It echoes with the cries of peacocks, is frequented by mighty tuskers. Filled with fruits and roots, it is sacred and pleasant.
2::54::36::You will see, O Rama, herds of elephants and deer ranging in the forest. 
2::54::37::Your heart will be filled with joy while you wander with Sita beholding rivers, waterfalls, plateaus, caverns and mountaintorrents.
2::54::38::The auspicious mountain (Chaitrakuta) resounds with the note of cheerful lapwings and cuckoos. Intoxicated elephants and deer move about in the enchanting mountain. There you may settle down in a hermitage. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुःपञ्चाश स्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyfourth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
