2::47::1::When the night advanced towards dawn the citizens were stunned not to see the scion of the Raghus (Rama). Overwhelmed with sorrow they lost their senses. 
2::47::2::Anguished and drenched with tears of grief they looked hither and thither but could not find even a trace of Rama.    
2::47::3::Those highminded people with sorrowful faces due to separation from sagacious Rama expressed themselves in piteous words:
2::47::4::Fie on this sleep which robbed us of our senses. We are unable to see (now) that broadchested and mightyarmed Rama.
2::47::5:: How is it that the mightyarmed Rama who never renders services done to him fruitless has deserted his devoted people and gone into exile? 
2::47::6::How could he, the best among the kings of Raghu dynasty, who used to protect us as a father protects his own children, go to the forest, abandoning us?
2::47::7:: We all will die here. We will go on the everlasting journey to death. Of what use is this life to us without Rama? 
2::47::8::There are plenty of dry logs of wood. We will prepare a pyre with them, set fire to it and we all will enter it.
2::47::9:: What shall we say (to the people)? How can we say, 'We have conducted him (to the forest), that scion of the Raghus, that mightyarmed Rama, who is of gentle speech and free from malice? 
2::47::10::Seeing us return without Rama, the women, children and  the aged of the city (Ayodhya) will certainly feel miserable and cheerless. 
2::47::11::Having left (that city) with the valiant and selfrestrained Rama, how can we now return without him ?
2::47::12::All of them with grief distressed, and with their arms thrown up lamented like cows deprived of their calves. 
2::47::13::For a short while they followed the tracks (of the chariot) and after having gone a little distance, they missed the way. They were again submerged in deep sorrow. 
2::47::14::When they could not find the tracks of the chariot, those highminded people turned back and said to themselves 'What is this? We have been deceived by fate. What are we to do now?' 
2::47::15::Thereafter, all of them, the virtuous people grieving, their minds fatigued, returned to Ayodhya the same way they had come. 
2::47::16::On seeing  the city the minds of the people were agitated due to the loss (of their prince). Tears streamed down their eyes, oppressed with sorrow. 
2::47::17::This city without Rama just as a river with serpents lifted away by Garuda from its depths looks no longer beautiful. 
2::47::18::Plunged in grief, they saw the city deprived of all joy, looking like a sky without the Moon and an ocean without water. 
2::47::19::Those people devoid of delight entered their rich mansions with great difficulty. Even though they, stricken with sorrow, looked at men and their own kinsmen they could not recognise them. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyseventh sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
