2::14::1:: The evil woman (Kaikeyi) said to the king of the Ikshvaku race who lay unconscious on the floor writhing and tormented with grief on account of his son. 
2::14::2::(Kaikeyi said) What is this? After hearing my response to the promised boon, why are you lying down on the floor dejected as if you had committed a sin? It behoves you to maintain your status.
2::14::3:: Those conversant with righteousness say that truth is a great virtue. By following the truth, I have enlightened you about your duty.  
2::14::4::O King O lord of the earth (king) Saibya attained the highest state by offering his own body to a hawk in accordance with his promise.
2::14::5:: In the same way the lustrous king Alarka, on being solicited by a brahmin who was an adept in the Vedas, plucked his own eyes and gave them to him without hesitation.
2::14::6::The ocean, lord of rivers, even when (tidal) time comes does not cross the shore in obedience to truth.
2::14::7:: Truth is Brahman in one word. Righteousness is firmly established in truth. Truth is the imperishable Vedas. The supreme state can be attained by means of truth.
2::14::8::O excellent one, if your mind is firmly fixed in righteousness, then by following it fulfil the boon granted to me.You are the bestower of boons indeed
2::14::9:: You must uphold righteousness. I also urge you to do that. Send your son Rama to the forest. I am repeating this statememt thrice.
2::14::10:: O noble one, if you do not fulfil the agreement, it will mean I have been abandoned by you. (Therefore) I will give up my life in your presence.   
2::14::11::In this way urged by Kaikeyi without fear or hesitation, he (Dasaratha), like Bali unable to release himself from the noose cast by Indra (through Vamana), could not get out of the noose of promise.
2::14::12:: Like a bullock, restlessly moving between the wheels and the yoke, Dasaratha's heart started beating wildly and his face turned pale.
2::14::13:: The king was unable to see with his eyes overwhelmed (with tears). Gaining with great difficulty a firm footing and courage he addressed Kaikeyi: 
2::14::14::O wicked woman, I held your hand amid chantings of mantras with the sacred fire (as witness). I now disown that hand, you and your son begotten by me. 
2::14::15:: O queen the night has departed and the Sun is about to rise. The preceptors now will definitely ask me to hasten for the consecration. 
2::14::16::With the materials already collected for the consecration of Rama he will perform my funeral rite of offering water to the dead.
2::14::17::O woman of inauspicious practices, since you are obstructing Rama's coronation, you and your son shall not perform my funeral rite of offering water to the dead. 
2::14::18:: Having seen people formerly enjoying happiness, I cannot see them again with their downcast, cheerless faces devoid of all happiness.
2::14::19::While the king was thus speaking to her (Kaikeyi) that holy night resplendent with the Moon and the stars, the day dawned.
2::14::20::Thereafter, Kaikeyi of sinful conduct and skilful in the use of words, rendered senseless by wrath, again addressing the king in harsh words said: 
2::14::21::O king, why are you speaking these painful, poisonous words? What is this? It behoves you to summon your son Rama who does not expearience this pain.
2::14::22::Only after you have  installed my son in the kingdom and sent Rama to the forest and  made me free from rivals, you shall have your duty fulfiled.
2::14::23:: The king who was very much incited by her words, like a horse of the best breed whipped by the lash, replied to Kaikeyi: 
2::14::24:: I am bound by bond of righteousness. My intellect is destroyed. I wish to see my beloved, virtuous firstborn, Rama.  
2::14::25:: The night dawned. Ths Sun rose. The auspicious time with the sacred star in (favourable) conjunction arrived. The virtuous Vasistha, surrounded by his disciples, soon entered the best of abodes with the articles collected (for the ceremony).
2::14::26::The streets in Ayodhya were swept and sprinkled with water, decorated with excellent flags, strewn with flowers of variegated colours and bedecked with various flower garlands. The streets were crowded with curious people rejoicing at the event. The stalls and markets were abundantly filled with merchandise.The city was full of great festivities. The people were curious to see Rama. Sandalwood and incense were burnt and fragrance pervaded in all the directions. The city resembled Amaravati, the abode of Indra.Vasistha entered the city, covered some distance and beheld the best inner apartment. There he saw host of brahmins, citizens and villagers. The best of inner apartments was graced with brahmins who were experts in sacrificial rituals priests and eminent  brahmins. 
2::14::27:: Having reached the inner apartment, the eminent ascetic, Vasistha felt very happy. He passed by the people and entered the inner apartment.
2::14::28:: Sage Vasistha saw handsome Sumantra, minister to Dasaratha, a lion among the charioteers coming out of the gate. 
2::14::29::Effulgent Vasistha said to the expert chariotieer Sumantra to inform the king immediately of his arrival.
2::14::30::Here are the pots filled with water from river Ganga and golden vessels with water from the seas. And throne made of udumbara wood for the installation ceremony. All kinds of seeds, perfumes, different kinds of precious stones, honey, curd, ghee, puffed grains, kusha grass (special grass used in rituals), flowers, milk, eight beautiful girls, an intoxicated elephant, a dignified chariot drawn by four horses, a sword, an elegant bow, a palanquin accompanied by bearers, an umbrella resembling the full Moon, two white fans made of Yak's tails, a golden vessel, a palecoloured humped bull, wearing golden gerland, a lion having four strong and large teeth, a mighty horse of the best breed, a throne, tiger skin, fire kindled with faggots, all kinds of musical instruments, courtesans, welldecorated women, preceptors, brahmins, cows, sacred animals and birds, eminent citizens and villagers, groups of merchants all speaking pleasant words and kings -- all are here for Rama's coronation. 
2::14::31:: Hasten the maharaja as Rama has to be installed in the kingdom as soon as the day breaks under the conjunction of the sacred Pushya star. 
2::14::32:: Having heard the words of the great Vasistha, charioteer Sumantra entered the  inner apartment, singing the praise of this tiger among kings (Dasaratha).
2::14::33:: The doorkeepers, beloved wellwishers of the king, did not detain aged Sumantra  who was liked by the king and who had arrived early. 
2::14::34::Sumantra approached the king unaware of the state of his mind and commenced praising him in highly pleasing words (as usual). 
2::14::35::Thereafter the charioteer Sumantra entered the inner apartment of the king, and with folded hands began singing the praise of the lord of the earth appropriate to the hour.
2::14::36::Just as the mighty ocean rejoices at sunrise, the inherently cheerful Sumantra became delighted to see the king.
2::14::37:: Just as Indra's charioteer at this time (at dawn) extols him, the conquerer of demons, so do I rouse you (with a song). 
2::14::38:: Just as the Vedas and Vedangas awaken the selfborn lord Brahma, so do I  awaken you.
2::14::39:: As the Sun along with the Moon awakens the auspicious earth which supports all  beings, in the same way I am awakening you today.
2::14::40:: O mighty king get up at once like the Sun rising up mount Meru. Put on your beautiful body auspicious robes befitting the festivity.  
2::14::41::O descendent of Kakutstha, may Moon and Sun, Siva and Kubera, Varuna, Agni and Indra bestow victory on you. 
2::14::42::O best among kings the holy night has passed. Having been acquainted with the acts accomplished so far, perform whatever is further necessary for the installation    ceremony. All preparations for Rama's coronation ceremony have since been complete.  
2::14::43:: Venerable Vasistha along with inhabitants of the city and countryside including merchants and brahmins with folded hands awaits you.
2::14::44::O king Rama's installation may be promptly ordered. As herds without herdsman, army without commander, night without the Moon, and cows without a bull, so is a kingdom without a king. 
2::14::45::Hearing these  meaningful words of Sumantra uttered in an appealing tone, the lord of the earth relapsed into grief.  
2::14::46::The virtuous and glorious king thinking of his son without cheer looked upward with eyes red with tears and said to the charioteer, You are causing my heart excruciating pain with your words. 
2::14::47:: Having heard the sorrowful words of the king and having seen his wretched state  Sumantra with palms folded moved away a little from the place.	
2::14::48:: When the king himself in that wretched state was not able to speak to Sumantra, crafty Kaikeyi said to him in reply:
2::14::49:: O Sumantra, excited with joy on account of the (proposed) installation of Rama, the king did not have a wink of sleep all night. He is weary and overpowered with sleep.
2::14::50::So, O Sumantra quickly fetch the gentle, illustrious prince Rama. Let there be no hesitation in this matter. 
2::14::51::Thinking that an auspicious event will take place, he rejoiced at heart and in obedience to royal order, left at once.
2::14::52::Urged by Kaikeyi, Sumantra thought 'Righteous Rama will definitely come here for the purpose of  installation'. 
2::14::53:: So thought the charioteer and filled with great delight left (the inner apartment), eager to see the mightyarmed Rama. 	 
2::14::54:: Sumantra, departed from the auspcious inner apartment which looked like the deep waters of the sea and saw people thronging the gate.
2::14::55:: Then Sumantra hastened towards the gate where he saw kings, wealthy people and citizens who had already arrived and waiting there.   इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुर्दशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fourteenth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
