2::15::1::वेदपारगा: wellversed in the Vedas, ते those, ब्राम्हणा: brahmins, तां रजनीम् that night, उष्य after staying, सहराजपुरोहिता: along with royal priests, उपस्थानम् to the pavilion (for consecration ceremony), उपतस्थु: assembled.
2::15::2::अमात्या: ministers, बलमुख्याश्च army chiefs, ये निगमस्य मुख्याः chiefs of the merchants' associations, राघवस्य of Rama, अभिषेकार्थे for the consecration, प्रियमाणा: brimming with joy, संगता: assembled.
2::15::3::विमले bright, सूर्ये Sun, उदिते having arisen, अहनि during day , पुष्ये च when Pushya star, अभ्यागते was ascendent, रामस्य Rama's, जन्म स्थिते constellation at the time of birth, कर्कटकलग्ने ascension of karkataka lagna, प्राप्ते had come, रामस्य Rama's, अभिषेकाय for the consecration, द्विजेन्द्रै: by the best of brahmins, उपकल्पितम् was decided.
2::15::4::काञ्चना: golden, जलकुम्भाश्च jars filled with water, स्वलंकृतम् welldecorated, भद्रपीठम् throne, भास्वता by a bright, व्याघ्रचर्मणा by the tiger skin, सम्यक् properly, आस्तीर्ण:  spread, रथः च chariot also, (भान्ति are shining.)
2::15::5::पुण्यात् from sacred, गङ्गायमुनयो: सङ्गमात् from the confluence of Ganga and Yamuna, पुण्या: holy, अन्या: other, या:सरित: streams, ह्रदा: ponds, कूपा: wells, सरांसि च lakes as well, आहृतम्  brought, जलम् water, प्राग्वाहा: flowing eastwards, ऊर्ध्ववाहा: flowing upwards, तिर्यग्वाहा: flowing zigzag, समाहिता: joined together, ताभ्य: च from them also, सर्वश: from all directions, समुद्रेभ्य: from all seas, आहृतम् has been collected, तोयम् water.
2::15::6::सलाजा: with puffed corn, क्षीरिभि: leaves from trees rich in sap, छन्ना: covered, पद्मोत्पलयुता:  with lotuses and waterlilies, परमवारिणा holy water, पूर्णा: filled with, काञ्चनराजता: made of gold and silver, घटा: vessels, भान्ति are shining.
2::15::7::क्षौद्रम् honey, दधि curds, घृतम् ghee, लाजा: puffed grain, दर्भा: darbha grass, सुमनस: flowers, पय: milk, शुभाचारा: wellmannered, सर्वाभरणभूषिता: adorned with all types of ornaments, वेश्या: च एव courtesans as well.
2::15::8::चन्द्रांशुविकचप्रख्यम् resembling diffused rays of the moon, काञ्चनम् made of gold, रत्नभूषितम् adorned with gems, रामस्य for Rama, उत्तमम् excellent, वालव्यजनम् a fan made of yak's tail, सज्जं तिष्ठति is held in readiness.
2::15::9::चन्द्रमण्डलसंकाशम् resembling the Moon's orb, पाण्डुरम् pale white, द्युतिकरम् lustrous like the pole star अभिषेकपुरस्कृतम् to be placed in front of the coronation pavilion, श्रीमत् majestic, आतपत्रं umbrella, सज्जम् is arranged.
2::15::10::पाण्डुर: pale white, वृष: bull, सज्ज: is kept ready, अश्व:च horse also, सुस्थित: in state, प्रसृत: flowing ichor (from its temples), श्रीमान् majestic, औपवाह्य: worthy of ride by a king, गज: च elephant also, प्रतीक्षते is awaiting.
2::15::11::सर्वाभरणभूषिता: adorned with all kinds of ornament, माङ्गल्या: auspicious, अष्टौ eight, कन्या:unmarried girls, सर्वाणि all sorts of, वादित्राणि musical instruments, वन्दिन: च also panegyrists, तथा and, परे others (stood waiting).
2::15::12::इक्ष्वाकूणाम् of the descendants of the Ikshvakus, राज्ये in the kingdom, अभिषेचनम् consecration, यथा as, संभ्रियेत् might have been arranged, तथा जातीयम् pertaining to that race, राजपुत्राभिषेचनम् for the consecration of the prince, आदाय having brought, राजवचनात् in accordance with the order of the king, तत्र there, समवेता: having assembled, ते they, महीपतिम् to the king, अपश्यन्त: not beholding, न: about us, क: नु who indeed, राज्ञ: to the king, प्रतिवेदयेत् inform, अब्रुवन् said, राजानम् to the king, न च पश्याम: (we) do not see, दिवाकर: च sun also, उदित: has risen, धीमत: sagacious, रामस्य Rama's, यौवराज्याभिषेक: च consecration as prince regent, सज्ज: is ready.
2::15::13::तेषु while they, इति thus, ब्रुवाणेषु were speaking, राजसत्कृत: the king's confidant, सुमन्त्र: Sumantra, तान् them, सर्वान् all, सार्वभौमान् sovereigns, महीपतीन् kings, इदम् this word, अब्रवीत् said.
2::15::14::अहम् I, राज्ञ: king's, नियोगेन by command, रामम् Rama, त्वरया quickly, प्रस्थित: अस्मि I am departing, भवन्त: तु as for all of you, राज्ञ: to the king, पूज्या: venerable, विशेषत: especially, रामस्य च for Rama also.
2::15::15::अयम् अहम् such I am, आयुष्मताम् longlived, वचनात् by your words, संप्रति बुद्धस्य to him now awake, राज्ञ: king's, सुखम् welfare, आगमनकारणं the reason for his coming, पृच्छामि I shall ask.
2::15::16::पुराणवित् one who is wellversed in history and tradition, सुमन्त्र: Sumantra, इति thus, उक्त्वा having spoken, अन्त:पुरद्वारम् entrance to the inner apartment, आजगाम approached, सदा always, सक्तम् remains closed, तत् that, वेश्म palace, प्रविवेश ह entered.
2::15::17::तदा then, स: he, प्रविश्य having entered, अस्य this, विशांपते: king's, वंशम् royal dynasty, तुष्टाव extoled, नरेन्द्रस्य king's, तत् शयनीयम् sleeping apartment, आसाद्य having approached, व्यतिष्ठत stood there.
2::15::18::स: he, तत् वेश्म that bedchamber, तिरस्करिणम् अन्तरा behind the screen, आसाद्य having approached, गुणयुक्ताभि: with virtues, अशीर्भि: with blessings, राघवम् son of Raghus dynasty (Dasaratha), अभितुष्टाव praised.
2::15::19::काकुत्स्थ O scion of the Kakutsthas (Dasaratha), सोमसूर्यौ Moon and Sun, शिववैश्रवणौ अपि Siva and Kubera also, वरुण: Varuna, अग्नि: Agni, इन्द्र: Indra, ते to you, विजयम् victory, प्रदिशन्तु let them grant.
2::15::20::भगवती holy, रात्रि: night, गता has passed, शिवम् auspicious, अह: day, उपस्थितम् has arrived, नृपशार्दुल O tiger among kings, बुद्ध्यस्व may wake up, अनन्तरम् later, कार्यम् acts, कुरु perform.
2::15::21::राघव born in the family of Raghu, नृप O king, ब्राह्मणा: brahmins, बलमुख्या: च army commanders, नैगमा: च merchants also, आगता: have arrived, दर्शनम् your audience, (अभि)  कांक्षन्ते request, प्रतिबुध्यस्व may awaken.
2::15::22::तत: thereafter, राजा king, प्रतिबुध्य being awake, तदा then, स्तुवन्तम् extoling, तम् मन्त्रकोविदम्  expert counseller, सूतम् charioteer, सुमंत्रम् to Sumantra, इदं वचनम् this word, अब्रवीत् said.
2::15::23::सूत O charioteer, रामम् Rama, आनय bring, इति thus, अनया by her, यत् अभिहित: असि you have been told, येन why, मम my, आज्ञा command, प्रतिहन्यते has been disregarded, इदं कारणं किम् what is the reason?
2::15::24::अहम् I, न च एव संप्रसुप्त: I have not slept, आशु instantly, राघवम् to son of the Raghus (Rama), इह here, आनय bring, इति thus, राजा दशरथ: king Dasaratha, तत्र there, सूतम् to the charioteer, पुन: again, अन्वशात् ordered.
2::15::25::स: he, राजवचनम् words of the king, श्रुत्वा having heard, तम् him, शिरसा bowing with his head down, प्रतिपूज्य offering salutations, महत् great, प्रियम् happy, मन्यमान: while reflecting, नृपावासात् from the kings's palace, निर्जगाम went out.
2::15::26::सूत: charioteer, प्रसन्न: cheerful, पताकाध्वजशोभितम् bedecked with pennants and banners, राजमार्गं च highway also, विलोकयन् seeing, हृष्ट: rejoiced, प्रमुदित: delighted, जगाम went.
2::15::27::स: सूत: that charioteer, तत्र there, हृष्टवत् happy, सर्वलोकस्य of all the citizens, अभिषेचनसंयुक्ता: relating to installation, रामाधिकरणा: in connection with Rama, कथा: conversation, श्रुश्राव heard.
2::15::28::तत: thereafter, सुमन्त्र: तु Sumantra on his part, कैलासशिखरप्रभम् in lustre comparable to the peak of Kailasa, शक्रवेश्मसमप्रभम् resembling in splendour the abode of Indra, रुचिरम् lovely, रामवेश्म palace of Rama, ददर्श beheld.
2::15::29::सूत: the charioteer, महाकवाटविहितम् closed with two heavy panels of doors, वितर्दिशतशोभितम् adorned with hundreds of galleries, काञ्चनप्रतिमैकाग्रम् having a peak on which were mounted golden idols, मणिविद्रुमतोरणम् arches studded with diamonds and pearls, शारदाभ्रघनप्रख्यम् as bright as dense autumnal clouds, दीप्तम् shining, मेरुगुहोपमम् like a cave of mount Meru, सुमहद्भि: extremely, वरमाल्यानाम् excellent garlands, मणिभ: with diamonds, अलंकृतम् ornamented, मुक्तामणिभि: with pearls and gems, आकीर्णम् strewn with, चन्दनागरुधूपितम् decorated with sandal and aloe wood, दार्दुरम् from mount Dardura, शिखरं यथा like its peak, मनोज्ञान् captivating the mind, गन्धान् fragrance, विसृजत् emitting, विनदद्भिः singing sweetly, सारसै: Sarasas, मयूरैश्च peacocks, विराजितम् shone, सुकृतेहामृगाकीर्णम् full of skilfully carved images of deer, तथा and, भक्तिभि: embellishments, सुकीर्णम् wellspread, तिग्मतेजसा with brilliant splendour, भूतानाम् living beings, मन: mind, चक्षुश्च the eye, आददत् captivated, चन्द्रभास्करसङ्काशम् as Sun and Moon, कुबेरभवनोपम् similar to the abode of Kubera, महेन्द्रधामप्रतिमम् reflected image of the abode of Mahendra, नानापक्षिसमाकुलम् crowded with birds of various kinds, मेरुशृङ्गसमम् (tall) like the peak of Mount Meru, उपस्थितै: having arrived, अञ्जलिकारिभि: with joined palms, जनै: by people, समाकीर्णम् filled with, तथा and, उपादाय with gifts, समाक्रान्तै: thronged (that palace) रामाभिषेकसुमुखै: eager to see Rama's coronation, उन्मुखै: eager, जानपदै: जनै: by villagers, अलंकृतम् decorated, महामेघसमप्रख्यम् looking like the vast cloud,  उदग्रम् lofty, सुविभूषितम् welldecked, नानारत्नसमाकीर्णम् filled with various gems, कुब्जकैरातकावृतम् crowded with hunchbacks and hunters, रामवेश्म palace of Rama, ददर्श ह beheld.
2::15::30::स: that, सारथि: charioteer, रामगृहाभिपातिना going towards the palace of Rama, वरूथिना (covered) with a wooden fender (as a defence against collision), वाजियुक्तेन harnessed with horses, रथेन by a chariot, नराकुलं (समाकुलम्) crowded with people, राजकुलम् royal palace, विराजयन् appearing, सर्वस्य all, पुरस्य city's, मनांसि minds, हर्षयन् delighting.
2::15::31::तत: thereafter, स: सारथि: that charioteer, महाधनम् opulent, महत् magnificent, मृगै: with deer, मयूरैश्च with peacocks, समाकुलोल्बणम् with pervading beauty, शचीपते: इव like that of the consort of Sachi, Indra, वरार्हस्य of a befitting man, गृहं palace, समासाद्य having reached, प्रहृष्टरोमा बभूव was thrilled.
2::15::32::स: that, रथी charioteer, तत्र there, कैलासनिभा: similar to Kailasa, स्वलंकृता: welldecorated, त्रिदशालयोपमा: like the abode of celestials, कक्ष्या: courtyards, प्रविश्य having entered, राममते close to Rama's heart, स्थितान् the waiting ones, बहून् many, वरान् best, प्रियान् friends, व्यपोह्य passing through, शुद्धान्तम् private apartment, उपस्थित: approached.
2::15::33::तत्र there, स: he, जनानाम् people's, रामाभिषेकार्थकृता: acts done for the enthronement of Rama, हर्षयुक्ता: happy, नरेन्द्रसूनो: prince's (Rama's), अभिमंगलार्था: for his wellbeing, सर्वस्य from everyone, लोकस्य people's, प्रहृष्ट: full of delight, गिर: words, शुश्राव heard.
2::15::34::सुमन्त्र: Sumantra, महेन्द्रसद्मप्रतिमम् resembling the abode of Indra, मृगपक्षिजुष्टम् filled with animals and birds, मेरो: mount Meru's, उच्चं high, शृङ्गम् इव like a summit, प्रभया with  splendour, विभ्रजमानम् shining, रम्यम् beautiful, रामस्य वेश्म Rama's palace, ददर्श beheld.
2::15::35::उपस्थितै: by men present, अञ्जलि कारकैश्च (अञ्जलि कारिभिश्च) paying obeisance with folded palms, सोपायनै: (with their hands ) full of gifts, विमुक्तयानै: having left their chariots, कोट्या in crores of, परार्धैश्च billions, जानपदै: villagers, जनैश्च citizens from towns, समाकुलं thronged, द्वारपथं gateway, ददर्श beheld.
2::15::36::तत: thereafter, महामेघमहीधराभम् resembling a great cloud or a vast mountain, प्रभिन्नम् ichor flowing from its temples, अत्यङ्कुशम् without caring for the goad, असह्यम् intolerant, उदग्रकायम् having a huge body, रामौपवाह्यम् fit to be mounted by Rama, रुचिरम्  beautiful, शत्रृञ्जयम् by name Satrunjaya, नागम् elephant, ददर्श beheld.
2::15::37::स्वलंङ्कृतान् welladorned, साश्वरथान् with horses and chariots, सकुञ्जरान् with elephants, वल्लभान् dear to the king, अमात्यमुख्यांश्च important ministers also, ददर्श saw, सूत: charioteer, समन्तत: on all sides, सहितान् assembled, व्यपोह्य getting out of the way, समृद्धम् glorious, अन्त:पुरम् private apartment, आविवेश entered.
2::15::38::तत: afterwards, सारथि: charioteer, अद्रिकूटाचलमेघसन्निभम् similar to motionless cloud over a  mountain peak, महाविमानोपमवेश्मसंयुतम् surrounded by splendid rooms, मकर: crocodile,  prevented, प्रविवेश entered.
