2::13::1::The maharaja lying on the floor resembled (king) Yayati fallen from heaven after his merits (earned earlier) were exhausted. He neither deserved nor was accustomed to such (humiliating) treatment. Fearless Kaikeyi ,the incarnate of misfortune having accomplished her purpose, displyaing feigned fear, urged the king again (without inhibition), about the boons:
2::13::2::The maharaja lying on the floor resembled (king) Yayati fallen from heaven after his merits (earned earlier) were exhausted. He neither deserved nor was accustomed to such (humiliating) treatment. Fearless Kaikeyi ,the incarnate of misfortune having accomplished her purpose, displyaing feigned fear, urged the king again (without inhibition), about the boons:
2::13::3::O great king you used to boast that you always speak the truth and are steadfast in your vows. Why are you now seeking to avoid granting me this boon?
2::13::4::Thus addressed by Kaikeyi, king Dasaratha flew into a temper for a while, and then as if in a state of delirium, replied:
2::13::5::Alas O ignoble woman, my enemy, your desire would be fulfilled after Rama, the foremost among men is exiled and I am dead. You will be happy thereafter
2::13::6::Even in heaven when the gods enquire about the welfare of Rama how will I convince them about his banishment repudiating the fact? What a catastrophe
2::13::7:: If I tell the truth, 'To please Kaikeyi I have sent Rama to the forest', none will believe it  and will consider it untruth.
2::13::8:: When I was issueless, I obtained mighty and valiant Rama with great effort as a son. How can I banish him? 
2::13::9::How can I exile Rama, whose eyes resemble lotus petals, who is learned, who has subdued his anger and who is always full of forgiveness?
2::13::10::Rama with a charming personality has a complexion like the blue lotus. He has long arms (with immense strength). How can I banish him to Dandaka forest? 
2::13::11::Rama deserves happiness not suffering. How can I  bear to see such a sagacious Rama undergoing distress? 
2::13::12::If death comes to me right now I shall be very happy because I will not have to inflict suffering on Rama who does not deserve it. 
2::13::13::O cruel, malevolent Kaikeyi, why do you propose such a harmful act against Rama who has truth as his prowess and who is so dear to me? Certainly, you will get unparalleled infamy and disgrace in this world. 
2::13::14::While Dasaratha was thus lamenting with a distracted mind, the Sun set and night fell. 
2::13::15::For the king who was in deep anguish and in tears the night appeared dark even though it was adorned with the lunar orb.
2::13::16::The old king Dasaratha, heaving hot sighs, started lamenting pitiably fixing his gaze at the sky like the sick:
2::13::17::'O auspiciouslooking Night adorned with stars, I do not wish to see the dawn. O gentle night, be kind to me I pray with folded hands'. 
2::13::18::'Or, pass off quickly. I do not want to see this merciless, malicious Kaikeyi who is the cause of this great misfortune'.
2::13::19::Having said this, the king spoke again with folded hands to Kaikeyi in order to appease her:
2::13::20::O gentle queen, I am an old man and my life is almost over. I am a wretch devoted to you. I am a man of good conduct. Do me this favour especially as I am  king.
2::13::21::O lady with fair hips, I hope whatever I have said has not been a cry in the (empty) sky. O young lady show me this favour. Surely you are kindhearted.
2::13::22:: O queen with beautiful, dark eyelashes, show pity on me. Let Rama receive this unbounded kingdom through you and you acquire fame.
2::13::23::O lady with heavy hips, charming eyes and a beautiful face, do this favour to me, to Rama, to the world, to all the preceptors and to Bharata too.
2::13::24::The king with a clean heart, whose eyes had been rendered red with weeping wailed  piteously. Even after hearing it, that malicious woman full of wicked thoughts did not act upon his word.  
2::13::25::Seeing his dear wife not pleased (despite his pleadings) and urging him, to the contrary, for the banishment of his son, the king overcome with grief fell down unconscious on the floor.
2::13::26::The night passed off with the highminded king lamenting this way and heaving deep sighs. When he got up, the eminent king stopped (the panegyrists) awakening him.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्रयोदशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirteenth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
