2::27::1::प्रियवादिनी speaking pleasant words, प्रियार्हा deserving affection, वैदेही Sita, एवम् thus, उक्ता spoken to, प्रणयादेव out of love, संक्रुद्धा mighty angry, भर्तारम् to her husband, इदम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::27::2::नरवरात्मज O Prince, राम Rama, यत् since, लघुतया lightly, त्वया by you, ध्रुवम् certainly, अपहास्यम् fit to be ridiculed, श्रुत्वा having heard, मे to me (by me also), इदम् these, किं वाक्यम् what words, भाषसे are speaking.
2::27::3::आर्यपुत्र O son of a noble monarch, पिता father, माता mother, भ्राता brother, पुत्रः son, तथा also, स्नुषा daughterinlaw, स्वानि their own, पुण्यानि merits, भुञ्जानाः while enjoying, स्वं स्वम् due to each of them, भाग्यम् destiny, उपासते are receiving.
2::27::4::पुरुषर्षभ O best of men, (Rama), भर्तुर्भाग्यं the destiny of husband, एका only, भार्या wife, प्राप्नोति receives, अतश्च therefore, अहमपि I also, वने in the forest, वस्तव्यमिति should dwell, अदिष्टा एव ordered.
2::27::5::पिता father, न not, आत्मजः son, न not, आत्मा own self, न not, माता mother, न not, सखीजनः friends, न not, नारीणाम् for women, इह here, प्रेत्य च in the next world also, सदा always, एकः alone, पतिः husband, गतिः is the ultimate refuge.
2::27::6::राघव son of the Raghus (Rama), अद्यैव now itself, त्वम् you, दुर्गम् impenetrable, वनम् forest, प्रस्थितः यदि if you set out, कुशकण्टकान् on thorns and on Kusa grass, मृद्नन्ती crushing, ते अग्रतः in front of you, गमिष्यामि I shall go.
2::27::7::वीर O Valiant one, ईर्ष्यारोषौ anger and jealousy, भुक्तशेषम् leftover after drinking, उदकम् इव like water, बहिष्कृत्य dismissing, विस्रब्ध: without hesitation, माम् me, नय take me, मयि in me, पापम् fault, न विद्यते does not exist.
2::27::8::प्रासादाग्रैः on top of mansions, विमानैर्वा or in lovely palaces, वैहायसगतेन वा moving in air, सर्वावस्थागता in all stages of  life, भर्तुः husband's, पादच्छाया shelter at his feet, विशिष्यते is preferable.
2::27::9::मात्रा च by mother, पित्रा च by father, विविधाश्रयम् with regard to diverse duties,  अनुशिष्टाअस्मि I have been instructed, मया by myself, यथा in such a way, वर्तितव्यम् to abide, संप्रति now, वक्तव्या नास्मि need not be told to me.
2::27::10::अहम् I, दुर्गम् impassable, पुरुषवर्जितम् uninhabited by men, नानामृगगणाकीर्णम् teeming with various kinds of animals, शार्दूलवृकसेवितम् inhabited by tigers and wolves, वनम् forest, गमिष्यामि I shall go.
2::27::11::त्रीन् लोकान् the three worlds, अचिन्तयन्ती without thinking, पतिव्रतम् duties to the husband, चिन्तयन्ती while thinking, वने in the forest, पितुः father's, भवने in the palace, यथैव the same way, सुखम् happily, निवत्स्यामि I shall dwell.
2::27::12::वीर O hero , नित्यम् always, ते to you, शुश्रूषमाणा doing service, नियता self possessed, ब्रह्मचारिणी observing vow of celibacy, मधुगन्धिषु honeyscented, वनेषु in forests, त्वया सह with you, रंस्ये I shall sport. 
2::27::13::मानद O bestower of honour, राम Rama, त्वम् you, इह here, वने in the forest, अन्यस्य of others, जनस्य man's, सम्परिपालनमपि protection also, कर्तुम् to do, शक्त: हि is capable, मम about my protection, किं पुनः why again say? 
2::27::14::अद्य today, त्वया सह along with you, वनम् to the forest, गमिष्यामि shall go, संशयः न no doubt about it, महाभाग O distinguished one, उद्यता resolved, अहम् I, निवर्तयितुम् to restrain, न शक्या not able.
2::27::15::नित्यम् always, फलमूलाशना living on fruits and roots, भविष्यामि I will become, संशयः  न no doubt, त्वया सह with you, निवसन्ती while living, ते to you, दुःखम् hardship, न करिष्यामि  will not do.
2::27::16::धीमता with the sagacious, नाथेन by my lord, त्वया along with you, सर्वत्र everywhere, निर्भीता  without fear, सरितः rivers, शैलान् mountains, पल्वलानि lakes and, वनानि च and the forests, द्रष्टुम् to see, इच्छामि I wish.
2::27::17::वीरेण by a warrior (like you), त्वया with you, सङ्गता in company of, सुखिनी happy, हंसकारण्डवाकीर्णाः abounding in swans and ducks, साधु पुष्पिताः fully bloomed, पद्मिनी: lotus ponds, द्रष्टुम् to see, इच्छेयम् I wish.
2::27::18::विशालाक्ष O largeeyed one, यतव्रता observing such vows, नित्यम् daily, तासु in those lotus ponds, अभिषेकम् bathing, करिष्यामि will take, परमनन्दिनी attaining great happiness, त्वया सह along with you, रंस्ये I will sport. 
2::27::19::एवम् in this way, अहम् I, त्वया सह with you, वर्षसहस्राणाम्  a thousand years, शतं वापि or even a hundred thousand years (of living with you), व्यतिक्रमम् bassing of time, न वेत्स्यामि   I shall not feel, मे to me, स्वर्ग: अपि even heaven, न मतः हि is not desirable.
2::27::20::नरव्याघ्र O best of men, राघव Rama, त्वया विना without you, मम to me, स्वर्गेऽपि even in heaven, वासः living, भविता यदि if it were to happen, अहम् I, तमपि that one also, न रोचये I do not like.
2::27::21::अहम् I, सुदुर्गमम् highly impenetrable, मृगायुतम् full of animals, वानरवारणैः with monkeys and elephants, वनम् to the forest, गमिष्यामि shall go, तव your, पादावेव feet alone, उपगृह्य taking refuge, संयता restraining myself, वने in the forest, पितुः father's, गृहे यथा like in his house, निवत्स्यामि I shall reside.
2::27::22::अनन्यभावाम् without any other thought, अनुरक्तचेतसम् with heart deeply attached, त्वया by you, वियुक्ताम् separated (from you), मरणाय for death, निश्चिताम् resolved, माम् me, नयस्व take, याचनाम् my prayer, साधु be welldisposed, कुरुष्व do, अतः for that, ते for you, मया by me, गुरुता burden, न भविष्यति will not be. 
2::27::23::धर्मवत्सलः devoted to righteousness, नृवरः best of men, तथा that way, ब्रूवाणामपि though speaking, सीताम् tp Sita, न निनीषति स्म was unwilling to take, सन्निवर्तने  to dissuade her, एनाम् to her, वने in the forest, निवासस्य of stay, दुःखितां प्रति to the grieved, बहु in many ways, उवाच च said.
