2::37::1::विनयज्ञः knower of politeness, रामः Rama, महामात्रवचः minister's words, श्रुत्वा having heard, तदा then, दशरथम् Dasaratha, विनीतवत् humbly, वाक्यम् words, अभ्यभाषत spoke.
2::37::2::राजन् O king, त्यक्तभोगस्य of forsaker of pleasures, सर्वतः  entirely, त्यक्तसङ्गस्य of one who has given up attachments, वने in the forest, वन्येन available in the forest, जीवतः subsisting, मे for me, अनुयात्रेण followers, किं कार्यम् what is the use?
2::37::3::यः such a man, द्विपश्रेष्ठम् best of elephants, दत्त्वा having given away, कक्ष्यायाम् rope tied to its girth, मनः mind, कुरुते will do, कुञ्जरोत्तमम् best elephant, त्यजतः of a man while  giving up, तस्य his, रज्जुस्नेहेन for attachment for the rope, किम् why? 
2::37::4::सताम् among the virtuous, श्रेष्ठ best, जगत्पते lord of the universe, तथा in that way, मम to me, ध्वजिन्या with the army, किम् what use?, सर्वाण्येव all things, अनुजानामि am giving away, मे to me, चीराण्येव tattered clothes only, आनयन्तु bring.
2::37::5::गच्छतः going away, चतुर्दश fourteen, वर्षाणि years, वने in the forest, वासम् dwelling, वसतः residing , मम to me, उभे two things, खनित्रपिटके a basket and a crowbar, समानयत bring.
2::37::6::अथ thereupon, कैकेयी Kaikeyi, जनौघे in the presence of the assembly of people, निरपत्रपा without any sense of shame, स्वयम् herself, चीराणि bark robes, अहृत्य having brought, परिथत्स्व  'wear', इति saying so, राघवम् to Rama, उवाच said.
2::37::7::पुरुषव्याघ्रः tiger (best) among men, सः he, कैकेय्याः from Kaikeyi, ते those, चीरे bark robes, प्रतिगृह्य having received, सूक्ष्मवस्त्रम् fine apparel, अपक्षिप्य after removing,  मुनिवस्त्राणि ascetic robes, अवस्त ह put on
2::37::8::लक्ष्मणश्चापि Lakshmana also, तत्रैव there only, पितुः father's, अग्रतः in front (presence), शुभे auspicious, वसने raiment, विहाय having discarded, तपसाच्छादने चैव the clothing of an ascetic, जग्राह accepted.
2::37::9::अथ then, कौशेयवासिनी wearing silk clothes, सीता Sita, आत्मपरिधानार्थम् meant for her to wear, चीरम् bark robes, समीक्ष्य having seen, पृषती doe, वागुरामिव like a (fowler's) snare, सन्त्रस्ता was frightened. 
2::37::10::सुदुर्मनाः with a deeply distressed mind, शुभलक्षणा of auspicious nature, धर्मज्ञा knows her duties, धर्मदर्शिनी perceives righteousness, सा जानकी that Sita, व्यपत्रपमाणेव as though feeling ashamed, कैकेयी from Kaikeyi, ते those, कुशचीरे garments made of kusa grass, प्रगृह्य having received, अशृसम्पूर्णनेत्रा with her eyes suffused with tears, गन्धर्वराजप्रतिमम् the very image of king of gandharvas, भर्तारम् to her husband, इदम् these words, अब्रवीत् spoke.
2::37::11::वनवासिनः forestdwellers, मुनयः sages, चीरम् (bark) tattered clothe, कथम् how, बध्नन्ति नु  wear them, इति thus, सा सीता that Sita, अकुशला unskilled (unhabituate), मुहुर्मुहुः again and again, मुमोह was perplexed.
2::37::12::सा जनकात्मजा that daughter of Janaka, (Sita), एकम् one end, चीरम् of garment, कण्ठे on the neck, कृत्वा having placed, पाणिना with hand, आदाय held, तत्र thereafter, अकुशला unskilled (unhabituated), व्रीडिता  feeling ashamed, तस्थौ stood.
2::37::13::धर्मभृताम् among protectors of righteousness, वरः foremost, रामः Rama, क्षिप्रम् quickly, आगम्य having come forward, तत् चीरम् that bark garment, तस्याः सीतायाः Sita's, कौशेयस्य silk garment's, उपरि upon, स्वयम् himself, बबन्ध fastened.
2::37::14::सीतायाः of Sita, चीरम् garment, बध्नन्तम् when he was fastening, उत्तमम् excellent, रामम्  Rama, प्रेक्ष्य having seen, अन्तःपुरगताः of the inner apartment, नार्यः women, नेत्रजम्  born of the eyes, वारि tears, मुमुचुः released.
2::37::15::परमायस्ताः profoundly distressed, ज्वलिततेजसम् with burning lustre, रामम् to Rama, ऊचुश्च also said, वत्स dear child, मनस्विनी highminded, इयम् this Sita, एवम् thus, वनवासे to dwell in the forest, न नियुक्ता was not ordered.
2::37::16::प्रभो  O lord, पितुः father's, वाक्यानुरोधेन in obedience to the words, विजनम् desolate, वनम् to the forest, गतस्य after you have left, तावत् till such time, नः for us, सफलम् fruitful, अस्याः her, दर्शनम् भवतु audience be available.
2::37::17::पुत्रक O son, सहायेन as companion, लक्ष्मणेन with Lakshmana, वनम् to the forest, गच्छस्व you may go, कल्याणी auspicious lady, इयम् she, तापसवत् like a hermit, वने in the forest, वस्तुम् to live, नार्हति is not worthy of.
2::37::18::पुत्र O son, न: our, याचनाम् prayer, कुरु you may accede, भामिनी lovely, सीता Sita, तिष्ठतु  remain here, धर्मनित्यः faithful to your duty, त्वम् you, स्वयम् on your own, स्थातुम् to remain, इदानीम् now, न इच्छसि हि do not desire.
2::37::19::दशरथात्मज: son of Dasaratha (Rama), तासाम् their, एवंविधाः such ways, वाचः words, शृण्वन् listening, तदा then, तुल्यशीलया similar in nature, सीतया by Sita, चीरम् bark robes, बबन्धैव got them fastened. 
2::37::20::तया by her, चीरे bark garment, गृहीते was worn, नृपतेः king's, गुरुः preceptor, वसिष्ठः Vasistha, समीक्ष्य having seen, सीताम् of Sita, निवार्य having restrained, कैकेयीम् to Kaikeyi, (वाक्यम्) अब्रवीत् said.
2::37::21::अतिप्रवृत्ते exceeding all limits of decency, दुर्मेधे a woman of evil mind, कुलपांसनि disgrace to the race, कैकेयि Kaikeyi, राजानम् to king, वञ्चयित्वा च having deceived, प्रमाणे conforming to the standards (of righteousness ), न अवतिष्ठसे are you not abiding
2::37::22::शीलवर्जिते  devoid of good conduct, देव्या by the divine, सीतया Sita, वनम् to the forest, न गन्तव्यम् need not go, सीता Sita, रामस्य Rama's, प्रकृतम् present, आसनम् royal throne, अनुष्ठास्यति she will occupy.
2::37::23::दारसङ्ग्रहवर्तिनाम् of men who guard their wives, सर्वेषाम् for all, दाराः wife, आत्मा हि is the very soul, इयम् this Sita, रामस्य Rama's, आत्मा इति soul,  मेदिनीम् this earth, पालयिष्यति will rule.
2::37::24::अथ otherwise, वैदेही Sita, रामेण with Rama, सङ्गता united, वनम् to the forest, यास्यति if goes, वयमपि all of us also, अनुयास्यामः will follow, इदम् this, पुरं च city also, गमिष्यति will go.
2::37::25::सदारः with his wife, राघवः descendant of the Raghus, यत्र where (lives), अन्तपालाश्च guardians of the harem, सहोपजीव्यम् living together with the patron, राष्ट्रं च the kingdom, सपरिच्छदम् along with the retinue, पुरं च the city, यास्यन्ति will go.
2::37::26::सशत्रुघ्नः Satrughna, भरतश्च also Bharata, चीरवासाः wearing bark robes, वनेचरः wandering in the forest, वने in the forest, वसन्तं living there, पूर्वजम् elder brother, काकुत्स्थम् Son of the Kakutstha (Rama), अनुवत्स्यति follow.
2::37::27::प्रजानाम् people's, अहिते in doing harm, स्थिता intent upon, दुर्वृत्ता with vile behaviour, त्वम् एका you alone, ततः after that, गतजनाम् deserted by men, शून्याम् empty, वसुधाम् earth, पादपैः सह  along with trees, शाधि rule.
2::37::28::यत्र where, रामः Rama, भूपतिः king, न not, तत् there, राष्ट्रम् kingdom, न भविता हि is not indeed there, यत्र where, रामः Rama, निवत्स्यति he dwells, तत् वनम् that forest also, राष्ट्रम् kingdom, भविता will become.
2::37::29::भरतः Bharata, महीपतेः of the king (Dasaratha), जात: यदि if born, पित्रा by father, अदत्ताम् not given, महीम् earth, शास्तुम् to rule, त्वयि in you, पुत्रवत् like a son, वस्तुं वा to live, न अर्हति is not fit.
2::37::30::त्वम् you, क्षितितलात् from the earth, गगनम् to the sky, उत्पतिष्यसि यद्यपि even if you can fly, पितुर्वंशचरित्रज्ञः knower of traditions of his father's dynasty, सः Bharata, अन्यथा otherwise, न करिष्यति will not act.
2::37::31::तत् therefore, पुत्रगर्धिन्या by a woman greedily guarding her son's interest, त्वया by you, पुत्रस्य of your son, अप्रियम् harm, कृतम् is done, लोके in this world, यः who, रामम् to Rama, अनुव्रतः follows, न not, सः he, न विद्येत हि will not be there.
2::37::32::कैकेयी Kaikeyi, रामेण सह along with Rama, गच्छतः leaving, पशुव्यालमृगद्विजान् flocks of cattle, elephants, deer and birds, तदुन्मुखान् bending towards him, पादपांश्च trees also, अद्यैव today, द्रक्ष्यसि you will see.
2::37::33::अथ then, देवि Devi (Kaikeyi), चीरम् bark robes, व्यपनीय having removed, स्नुषायै your daughterinlaw, उत्तमानि precious, आभरणानि ornaments, देहि give, अस्याः her, चीरम् bark robes, न प्रविधीयत was not decided, इति thus, वसिष्ठः Vasistha, तत् that, वसनम् garment, न्यवारयत् prevented.
2::37::34::केकयराजपुत्री O daughter of the king of Kekaya, त्वया by you, एकस्य रामस्य only for Rama, वने in the forest, निवासः dwell, वृतः is sought for, इयम् this Sita,  विभूषिता welladorned,  प्रतिकर्मनित्या engaged daily in decorating, राघवेण सह along with Rama, अरण्ये in the forest, वसतु shall live. 
2::37::35::राजपुत्री princess Sita, मुख्यैः with excellent, यानैश्च with chariots, परिचारकैश्च with attendants, सुसंवृता surrounded by, वस्त्रैश्च with garments, सर्वैः with everything, सहितैः together, विधानैः necessities, गच्छतु let go, ते your, वरसम्प्रदाने while seeking boons, इयम् this Sita, न वृता is not included.
2::37::36::नृपस्य king's, गुरौ preceptor, अप्रतिमप्रभावे possessing incomparable  power, विप्रमुख्ये foremost of brahmins, तस्मिन् that Vasistha, तथा in that way, जल्पति  speaking, सीता Sita, प्रियस्य beloved, भर्तुः husband, प्रतिकारकामा to serve him, विनिवृत्तभावा to swerve from her resolve, नैव स्म did not agree.
