2::107::1:: Wellhonoured in the midst of relatives, the celebrated Rama, elder brother of Lakshmana, then said to Bharata who was going to speak again. 
2::107::2::Appropriate are the words spoken by you born to the celebrated king Dasaratha through Kaikeyi.
2::107::3::Earlier when our father was to wed your mother, O dear brother, he had promised to your maternal grandfather that he would confer (on her) a kingdom with good revenue.
2::107::4::Thereafter in the battle between gods and demons, the able king (Dasaratha) pleased  (with your mother) granted her a boon (as a token of gratitude).
2::107::5::Thereafter, O tiger among men, your illustrious mother of fair complexion, under oath demanded of that best of men, king Dasaratha, the two boons, namely kingdom for you and banishment for me. Bound by such agreement (oath), the king granted her the boons.
2::107::6::Thereafter, O tiger among men, your illustrious mother of fair complexion, under oath demanded of that best of men, king Dasaratha, the two boons, namely kingdom for you and banishment for me. Bound by such agreement (oath), the king granted her the boons.
2::107::7::O best of men, that is why I have been ordered by father to live in the forest for fourteen years as per the (condition of the) boon.
2::107::8::I have come to this lonely forest accompanied by Lakshmana and Sita, bent upon upholding the truth of our unrivalled father's words.
2::107::9::O Indra among kings, let your coronation be performed without delay since you are worthy and at the same time the truthfulness of our father's words be honoured.
2::107::10::O Bharata, release for my sake the competent king from his debt (of vow) and honour the righteous father and the mother as well. 
2::107::11::Dear (brother), it is heard that long ago an illustrious king while performing a sacrifice intended for ancestors at a sacred place known as Gaya, the sacrificer Gaya chanted a Vedic hymn as follows:
2::107::12::Putra is so called as he delivers his father from a hell known as Put and protects the ancestors in all possible ways.
2::107::13::One should desire many virtuous and learned sons so that at least one of them may go to Gaya (to perform the father's obsequies). 
2::107::14::O enhancer of the king's delight, O best of men rajarsis have decided this way. You may, therefore, O lord, protect your father against hell.
2::107::15::O valiant Bharata, go to Ayodhya accompanied by Satrughna and the twiceborn (brahmins) and keep the subjects delighted like pleased (with your rule).
2::107::16::O king (Bharata) I shall also enter the Dandaka forest without delay in the company of only these two -- the princess from Videha (Sita) and Lakshmana.
2::107::17::O Bharata, be the king of men. I shall also become the supreme king of the wild beasts in the forest. Go now happily to Ayodhya, the best of cities, and I shall enter Dandaka forest with delight.
2::107::18::Let an umbrella protect you against (scorching) sunshine and provide its cool shade over your head, O Bharata As for me, I shall happily seek the shade of these dense woodland trees.
2::107::19::O Bharata, intelligent Satrughna will be your support and son of Sumitra (Lakshmana) as is wellknown will remain my best friend. All four of us, worthy sons of Dasaratha, shall follow the path of truth of our father. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the one hundredseventh sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
