2::29::1::सीता Sita, रामस्य Rama's, एतत् these, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा तु having heard, दुःखिता sad, प्रसक्ताश्रुमुखी with tears flowing incessantly from her face, मन्दम् in a faint  voice, इदं वचनम् these words, अब्रवीत् spoke.
2::29::2:: वने in the forest, वस्तव्यतां प्रति about dwelling in the forest, त्वया by you, ये those, दोषाः difficulties, कीर्तिताः described, तव your, स्नेहपुरस्कृतान् accompanied by your affection, तान् them, गुणानित्येव as virtues only, विद्धि understand.
2::29::3:: राघव Rama, मृगाः antelopes, सिंहाः lions, गजाश्चैव elephants also, शार्दूला: tigers, तथा also, शरभाः sarabhas (a fabulous deer said to have eight legs), पक्षिणः birds, सृमराश्चैव srimaras (a kind of deer), अन्ये other, ये all, वनचारिणः wild beasts wandering in the forest, ते सर्वे all those, तव your, अदृष्टपूर्वरूपत्वात् which had not been seen by you before, रूपम् your appearance, दृष्ट्वैव on seeing alone, अपसर्पेयुः will flee away, भये when fear arises, सर्वे all, बिभ्यति हि are afraid of.
2::29::4:: गुरुजनाज्ञया with the command of elders, त्वया सह along with you, मया च गन्तव्यम् I should follow, राम Rama, त्वद्वियोगेन if separated from you, मे my, जीवितम् life, इह here, त्यक्तव्यम् will have to be given up.
2::29::5:: राघव O Rama, त्वत्समीवस्थाम् in your company, माम् me, सुराणाम् for gods, ईश्वरः lord, शक्र:  अपि even Indra, ओजसा with his might, प्रधर्षयितुम् to injure, न शक्नोति will not be able
2::29::6::या नारी a woman, पतिहीना without her husband, सा she, जीवितुम् to live, न शक्ष्यति cannot live, राम Rama, त्वया by you, कामम् greatly, एवं विधम् in this manner, मम to me, निदर्शितम्  has been illustrated.
2::29::7::महाप्राज्ञ O Sagacious one, अथ चापि moreover, पुरा formerly, पितृगृहे at my father's  house, मया by me, ब्राह्माणानाम् brahmins' (word), श्रुतम् has been heard, मे about me, सत्यम् in sooth, वने in the forest, वस्तव्यं किल to dwell certainly.
2::29::8::महाबल O mighty one, अहम् I, पुरा long ago, लक्षणिभ्यः from palmist, द्विजातिभ्यः from brahmins, वचनम् words, शृत्वा having heard, नित्यमेव always, वनवासकृतोत्साहा I have become eager to dwell in the forest.
2::29::9::प्रिय O beloved Rama, मया by me, वनवासस्य to dwell in the forest, सः आदेशः such orders, प्राप्तव्यः किल certainly needs to be obtained, सा अहम् such I am, त्वया सह along with you, तत्र there, यास्यामि I shall accompany, अन्यथा न not otherwise.
2::29::10:: कृतादेशा carrying out the orders, भविष्यामि I shall become, त्वया सह along with you, गमिष्यामि shall go, अयम् this, कालश्च time, समुत्पन्नः has come, द्विज: brahmin, सत्यवाक् true to his words, भवतु let him be.
2::29::11:: वीर O valiant one, वनवासे while residing in the forest, दुःखानि hardships, बहुथा किल  certainly of every kind, अभिजानामि I am aware, अकृतात्मभिः by those whose senses are not under their control, पुरुषैः by men, नियतम् definitely, प्राप्यन्ते will be experienced.
2::29::12::पितुः father's, गेहे in the house, कन्यया when I was young, मया by me, मम मातुः my mother's, अग्रतः in the presence, साधुवृत्तायाः a saint, भिक्षिण्या a female mendicant, इह  in this world, वनवासः forest life, श्रुतः heard.
2::29::13:: प्रभो O Lord, पूर्वम् in the past, त्वम् you, बहुतिथम् for a long time, मे for me, प्रसादितश्च वै  favoured, त्वया सह along with you, वनवासस्य गमनम् to go to the forest, काङ्क्षितं हि is wished for.
2::29::14::राघव Rama, ते to you, वनवासस्य of forest life, गमनं प्रति about departure, अहम् I, कृतक्षणा counting time, ते भद्रम् prosperity to you, शूरस्य of a valiant one,  चर्या movement, मम to me, रोचते हि is pleasing.
2::29::15:: शुद्धात्मन् O purehearted one, प्रेमभावात् with feeling of love, भर्तारम् husband, अनुगच्छन्ती following, विकल्मषा sinless, भविष्यामि I shall become, भर्ता husband, मम to me, दैवतं हि is a god.
2::29::16::प्रेत्यभावेऽपि even after death, त्वया सह with you, मे to me, कल्याणः auspiciousness, सङ्गमः union, यशस्विनाम् by the famous, ब्राह्मणानाम् brahmins', पुण्या pious, श्रुतिः statement from the Vedas, श्रूयते is heard, महामते O highminded one, या स्त्री that woman, इह लोके in this world, पितृभिः by parents, यस्य to whom, स्वधर्मेण in accordance with one's own tradition, अद्भि: with waters, दत्ता is given, प्रेत्यभावेऽपि even after death, सा she, तस्य belongs to him.
2::29::17:: त्वम् you, केन हेतुना for what reason, इह now, एवम् this way, सुवृत्ताम् a woman of good conduct, पतिव्रताम् faithful and loyal wife, स्वकां नारीम् your own woman, माम् me, अस्मात्  from this place, नेतुम् to take, नाभिरोचयसे you are not willing.
2::29::18::काकुत्थ्स O descendant of Kakutstha, भक्ताम् devotee, पतिव्रताम् faithful to the husband, दीनां distressed, सुखदुःखयोः in happines and sorrow, समाम् having equal disposition, समान सुख दुःखिनीम् equally share your prosperity and adversity, माम् me, नेतुम् अर्हसि should take.
2::29::19:: एवम् in this, दुःखिताम् distressed, माम् me, वनम् to the forest, नेतुम् to take, न च इच्छसि यदि if you do not wish, मृत्युकारणात् to seek death, विषम् poison, अग्निम् fire, जलं वा or water, आस्थास्ये I shall take refuge.
2::29::20:: एवम् in this way, सा she, गमनं प्रति about her departure, बहुविधम् in several ways, तम् him, याचते requested, महाबाहुः mightyarmed Rama, ताम् her, विजनम् desolate, वनम् forest, नेतुम्  to take, नानुमेने did not consent.
2::29::21:: एवम् in this way, उक्ता spoken, सा मैथिली that daughter from Mithila, नयनच्युतैः fallen from her eyes, उष्णैः by warm, अश्रुभिः tears, गाम् the ground, स्नापयन्तीव as if drenching, चिन्ताम् grief, समुपागता obtained.
2::29::22:: आत्मवान् selfpossessed, सः काकुत्स्थ: that scion of the Kakutstha dynasty, तथा that way, चिन्तयन्तीम् grieving, ताम्रोष्ठीम् to the lady with copperred lips, तां सीताम् to that Sita, तदा then, निवर्तयितम् to dissuade her (from going to the forest), बहु many ways, असान्त्वयत् consoled.
