2::86::1::Then Guha, the forest ranger, described to Bharata the countless qualities of the goodnatured, magnanimous Lakshmana:
2::86::2::I spoke to the virtuous Lakshmana, who was holding arrows, bow and sword in his hand and keeping awake completely for the protection of his brother.
2::86::3::My friend, Lakshmana, the delight of the Raghavas this comfortable couch has been arranged for you. Lie down peacefully without any anxiety.
2::86::4::O righteous one you are used to conforts where as all of our people are accustomed to hardships. So we will stay awake and protect Rama. 
2::86::5::To me, there is none on earth dearer than Rama. Do not have any anxiety. I am telling you the truth.
2::86::6::By the grace of Rama, I want to acquire in this world great renown, abundance of righteousness, absolute artha (prosperity) and kama (pleasure).
2::86::7::As for me, bow in hand and all my kinsmen with me, I shall protect my dear friend Rama who is resting with Sita.  
2::86::8::Nothing is unknown to me in this forest in which I range about continually. We can withstand an army of four divisions in a battle.
2::86::9::The magnanimous Lakshmana, established in dharma, replied: 
2::86::10::While Rama sleep on the ground with Sita, how can I find sleep or joy or comfort?
2::86::11:: O Guha behold Rama, whom gods and demons combined cannot withstand in a battle now lying on a bed of grass with Sita.
2::86::12::Rama is the only one among the sons who resembles his father in various virtues. Dasaratha obtained him after a great deal of austerities and efforts as well.
2::86::13:: After Rama is exiled, king Dasaratha will not survive for long and surely the earth will soon be widowed.
2::86::14:: The women of the inner apartment who lamented loudly, must have stopped weeping out of weariness. By now, the clamour in the king's palace would have surely subsided.
2::86::15::I doubt whether the king, Kausalya and my mother Sumitra and the rest of them will outlive this night.
2::86::16::My mother might live, looking at Satrughna. But Kausalya, who is the mother of a hero, will die from extreme grief.
2::86::17::My father, king Dasaratha, failing to fulfil his cherished desires one after another and unable to place Rama on the throne, will pass away.
2::86::18::When the moment of death arrives for my father, those who perform the funeral rites for him would have fulfilled their desire. 
2::86::19::There in the capital of my father with its lovely crossroads and squares, welllaid  highways, full of mansions and palaces encrusted with all kinds of precious stones, teeming with elephants, horses and chariots, resounding with trumpets, and with wellbeing everywhere, and plenty of pleasuregardens, and parks and community festivals, people sound in health would be moving about in great comfort. 
2::86::20::Can we ever reenter Ayodhya happily after safely fulfilling the vow and completing the term of exile?
2::86::21::While the highminded prince was lamenting this way and was waiting, the night passed off.
2::86::22::The next morning when the Sun shone bright, both of them matted their hair on the bank of the river Bhagirathi (Ganga) and I ferried them across comfortably.
2::86::23::Rama and Lakshmana, slayers of enemies, who are as strong as bull elephants, with their hair matted, wearing robes made of bark, armed with excellent bows, arrows and swords went along with Sita looking around (vigilantly).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षडशीतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eightysixth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
