2::97::1::Thereafter, Rama pacified Lakshmana, son of Sumitra who was violently agitated. He said to him who had swooned with rage:
2::97::2::When sagacious Bharata of great strength has come here, where is the need for a bow or a sword or a shield.
2::97::3::O Lakshmana, having sworn that I would make father's word true, what shall I do with the kingdom earned slanderously by slaying Bharata who has come (to see me)?
2::97::4::I shall never accept any wealth obtained by destroying kith and kin or friends which is akin to taking food prepared with poison.
2::97::5::O Lakshmana, on the oath of righteousness, I wish wealth and pleasure as well as this kingdom for the sake of you all. 
2::97::6::O Lakshmana, I desire this kingdom only for the unity and happiness of my brothers. I swear on the weapon I hold.
2::97::7:: O gentle Lakshmana, lordship of this earth with the sea as its garment is not difficult to obtain (for me). But I do not desire even Indrahood by unrighteous means.
2::97::8::O protector of honour even if there were to be some happiness which I could enjoy without you, Bharata, and Satrughna, let it be reduced to ashes by fire.  
2::97::9::O best among men, O valiant one I think Bharata who is affectionate towards his brothers and who is dearer to me than my life, must have returned to Ayodhya and has heard that I had been exiled along with you and Janaki, wearing barks and matted locks. Remembering the duties of the race with an afflicted mind and with agitated senses he has come here to see me. He has not come with any other intention.
2::97::10::Auspicious Bharata, angry with Kaikeyi and having spoken to her unpleasant, bitter words and having propitiated our father, has come here to offer me the kingdom.
2::97::11::Finding the time appropriate, Bharata has come to see us. Even in his mind he would have never thought of causing any harm to us in any way.
2::97::12::Why are you suspicious of Bharata? Has he done anything disagreeable to you any time in the past?
2::97::13::You must not speak any harsh or unpleasant words against Bharata. If you do, they will be deemed to be directed against me.
2::97::14::Whatever be the calamity, O Lakshmana, how will sons slay their father, or a brother kill his own brother who is as dear to him as his own life?
2::97::15:: If you are saying all these words only for the sake of the kingdom, then I shall ask Bharata when I see him to offer this kingdom to you.
2::97::16::O Lakshmana if I earnestly exhort Bharata to offer this kingdom to you, then on hearing those words, he would say, 'Certainly so'.
2::97::17::Having heard the words uttered by his brother, Rama of virtuous disposition, Lakshmana who was devoted to his brother's welfare, shrank.
2::97::18:: Hearing the words of Rama, Lakshmana was abashed and said I think it is our father, king Dasaratha who has come here personally to see you. 
2::97::19::Observing Lakshmana's abashment, Rama said I think the mightyarmed king Dasaratha has come to see all of us here.
2::97::20::Or rather having thought of the adversities of dwelling in a forest and also by realising  that both of us are accustomed to comforts, I think he has certainly come to take us back home. 
2::97::21::Our father, the prosperous Dasaratha, after withdrawing this princess Vaidehi who is brought up in luxury from the forest (to Ayodhya), will return.
2::97::22::O valiant warrior, you can see those two splendid horses of high pedigree, charming, swift and equal to wind in speed are shining (in the army).
2::97::23::There is that huge and aged elephant named Satrunjaya which belogns to our sagacious father proceeding at the head of the army.
2::97::24::I do not see, O longarmed one that splendid white canopy of my father, wellrespected by men. And this gives rise to doubts in my mind.
2::97::25::Get off the treetop, O Lakshmana, and do what I say said the righteous Rama.
2::97::26::Lakshmana, the conqueror of foes, descended from the top of the sala tree and stood by the side of Rama with folded palms.
2::97::27::Let not the hermitage be crowded commanded Bharata, and the army encamped  around the mountain. 
2::97::28::Bharata's army full of horses, elephants and chariots covering a distance of more than one and a half yojanas encamped by the side of the mountain.
2::97::29::The army brought by Bharata, the great moralist, was shining around Chitrakuta mountain following dharma, and casting off all pride, in order to please Rama.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तनवतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the ninetyseventh sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
