2::55::1::अरिन्दमौ destroyers of enemies, राजपुत्राः the (two) princes, तत्र there, रजनी night, उषित्वा having spent, अथ thereafter, महर्षिम् great sage (Bharadwaja), अभिवाद्य having offered obeisance, तं गिरिं प्रति in the direction of that mountain, जग्मतुः went.
2::55::2::सः महर्षिः that great sage, तेषाम् to them, स्वस्त्ययनम् blessings for their safe journey, चकार ह made, प्रस्थितान् set forth, तान् them, प्रेक्ष्य having seen, पिता father, पुत्रानिव like his own children, अन्वगात् च followed also.
2::55::3::ततः then, महातेजाः effulgent, महामुनिः great sage, सः भरद्वाजः that Bharadwaja, सत्यपराक्रमम् to one whose strength is truth, रामम् to Rama, वचनम् words, वक्तुम् to tell, प्रचक्रमे began.
2::55::4::मनुजर्षभौ two (best) among men, गङ्गायमुनयोः सन्धिम् the confluence of Ganga and Yamuna, गत्वा having reached, पश्चान्मुखाश्रिताम् flowing westward, कालिन्दी नदीम् river Kalindi (Yamuna), अनुगच्छेताम् proceed along.
2::55::5::राघवौ the scions of the Raghus (Rama and Lakshmana), अथ then, शीघ्रस्रोतसम् rapidiy flowing आपगाम् river, कालिन्दीम् Kalindi (Yamuna), आसाद्य having reached, प्रचलितम् served by many, पुराणम् ancient, तस्याः तीर्थम् spot on the river bank, प्रेक्ष्य finding, तत्र there, यूयम् you, प्लवम् a raft, कृत्वा having made, अंशुमतीम् that daughter of the Sun (Yamuna), नदीम् river, तरत cross over.
2::55::6::ततः हरितच्छदम् with lush green leaves, महान्तम् large, बहुभि: by many, वृक्षै: trees, विवृध्दम्  densely grown, सिध्दोपसेवितम् inhabited by siddhas (sages who have attained perfection), श्यामम् dark (shady), न्यग्रोधम् banyan tree, आसाद्य having approached, सीता Sita, तस्मै to it, अञ्जलिम् folded palms, कृत्वा having made, शिवाः auspicious, आशिष: invocations, प्रयुञ्जीत offer.
2::55::7::तम् वृक्षम् that tree, समासाद्य having reached, वसेद्वा one may tarry or, अतिक्रमेत वा or can go past, तत: from there, क्रोशमात्रम् at a distance of a krosa, गत्वा having gone, नीलम् dark, पलाशबदरीमिश्रम् mixed with Palasa and Badari trees, यामुनै: on Yamuna, वंशै: च with bamboos also, रम्यम् beautiful, काननम् forest, द्रक्ष्यथ you will see.
2::55::8::स: that one, चित्रकूटस्य of Chitrakuta, पन्था: path, मया by me, बहुश: several times, गत: gone, रम्य beautiful, मार्दवयुक्तश्च marked with smoothness, वनदावै: forest fires, विवर्जित: is without.
2::55::9::स: महर्षि: that great sage, इति thus, पन्थानम् path, आवेद्य after directing, रामेण by Rama, तथेति 'so be it', उक्त्वा having said, अभिवाद्य paying obeisance, विनिवर्तित: having been requested to return, न्यवर्तत turned back.
2::55::10::तस्मिन् मुनौ the sage (Bharadhwaja), उपावृत्ते having turned back, राम Rama, लक्ष्मणम् to Lakshmana, अब्रवीत् said, सौमित्रे son of Sumitra, Lakshmana, कृतपुण्या: स्म we are fortunate indeed, यत् since, मुनिः the sage, न: on us, अनुकम्पते is showing compassion.
2::55::11::मनस्विनौ nobleminded, तौ those two, पुरुषव्याघ्रौ tigers (best) among men, इति thus, मन्त्रयित्वा conversing, सीताम् to Sita, अग्रत: इव ahead of them, कृत्वा keeping, कालिन्दीं नदीम्     towards river Kalindi (Yamuna), जग्मतु: proceeded.
2::55::12::अथ thereafter, सर्वे all of them, शीघ्रस्रोतोवहाम् rapidly flowing, कालिन्दीं नदीम् river Kalindi, आसाद्य having reached, नदीजलतितीर्षव: wishing to cross the river, चिन्ताम् अपेदिरे pondered.
2::55::13::अथ then, तौ both of them, शुष्कै: with dry, वंशै: bamboos, समास्तीर्णम् wellspread, उशीरै: fragrant roots of Ushira bush, समावृतम् covered with, काष्टसङ्घातम् with logs of wood joined together, महाप्लवम् big float, चक्रतु: made.
2::55::14::तत: then, वीर्यवान् valiant, लक्ष्मण: Lakshmana, वेतसशाखाश्च stems of reeds, जम्बूशाखाश्च   branches from Jambu tree, छित्वा after cutting, सीताया: for Sita, सुखम् comfortable, आसनम् seat, चकार made.
2::55::15::दाशरथि: Dasaratha's son, रामः Rama, तत्र there, श्रियमिव looking like Lakshmi (goddess of wealth), अचिन्त्याम् inconceivable (majesty), ईषत् a little, संलज्जमानाम् feeling shy, ताम् प्रियाम् that beloved Sita, प्लवम् float, अध्यारोपयत ascended.
2::55::16::राम: Rama, तत्र there, प्लवे on the float, वैदेह्याः Sita's, पार्श्वे on the side of, वसने clothes, भूषणानि च ornaments, कठिनकाजं a crowbar and a basket, आयुधै: weapons, चक्रे placed.
2::55::17::वीरौ heroes, तौ those two, दशरथात्मजौ Dasratha's sons, सङ्घाटम् that float, प्रतिगृह्य  tightly holding, प्रथमम् at first, सीताम् Sita, आरोप्य making her board, ततः then, यत्तौ carefully, प्रतेरतुः crossed.
2::55::18::कालिन्दीमध्यम् the middle of the river Kalindi (Yamuna), आयाता on reaching, सीता Sita, एनाम् to this river, अवन्दत made reverential salutation, देवी O goddess, त्वाम् you, तरामि crossing,  स्वस्ति let safety be ours, मे my, पति: husband, व्रतम् vow, पारयेत् may fulfil, रामे Rama, स्वस्ति safely, इक्ष्वाकुपालिताम् ruled by Ikshvaku kings, पुरीम् city of Ayodhya, प्रत्यागते on his return, त्वाम् you, गोसहस्रेण with the offer of a thousand cows, सुराघटशतेन च with a hundred pots of wine, यक्षे will worship.   
2::55::19::वरवर्णिनी lady of fair complexion, सीता Sita, कालिन्दीम् Yamuna, कृताञ्जलि: folding her  hands, याचमाना in supplication, अथ thereafter, दक्षिणं तीरमेव southern bank, अभिसम्प्राप्ता reached.
2::55::20::तत: then, शीघ्रगाम् swiftflowing, ऊर्मिमालिनीम् full of waves, तीरजै: growing on the banks, बहुभि: many, वृक्षै: trees, अंशुमतीम् daughter of the Sungod, यमुनां नदीम् river Yamuna, सन्तेरु: crossed. 
2::55::21::तीर्णा: having crossed, ते they, प्लवम् raft, उत्सृज्य after leaving, यमुनावनात् from the forest adjoining Yamuna river, प्रस्थाय after starting, हरितच्छदम् a place full of greenery, शीतलम्  cool, श्यामम् dark, न्यग्रोधम् banyan tree, असेदु: reached. 
2::55::22::वैदेही Sita, तं न्यग्रोधम् that banyan tree, उपागम्य having reached, वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवीत् said, महावृक्ष O great tree, ते to you, नम:अस्तु my salutations, मे पतिः my husband, व्रतम् vow, पारयेत् may fulfil, कौशल्यां च and Kausalya, यशश्विनीम् illustrious, सुमित्रां च also Sumitra, पश्येयम् may I behold, सीता Sita, इति in this way, अञ्जलिं कृत्वा offering reverential salutations with folded hands, वनस्पतिम् to the tree, पर्यगच्छत् went round.
2::55::23::तत: then, रामः Rama, अयाचन्तीम् who was seeking blessings, अनिन्दिताम् blemishless, दयिताम् beloved, विधेयां च and obedient, सीताम् Sita, अवलोक्य having seen, लक्ष्मणम् to Lakshmana, अब्रवीत् said.
2::55::24::द्विपदां वर best among bipeds (men), भरतानुज brother of Bharata (Lakshmana), त्वम् you, सीताम् Sita, आदाय taking with you, अग्रत: ahead, गच्छ go, अहम् I, सायुध: armed with weapons, पृष्ठत: from behind, गमिष्यामि will follow.
2::55::25::जनकात्मजा daughter of Janaka, यद्यत्फलम् whichever fruit, पुष्पं वा or flower, प्रार्थयते requests for, तत्तत् that one, अस्या: वैदेह्या: for this Sita, मन: mind, यत्र where, रमते takes pleasure, प्रदद्य give.
2::55::26::गच्छतोः going like that, तयोः of both, मध्यगता moving in the middle, जनकात्मजा daughter of Janaka, मातङ्गयोः of two male elephants, मध्यगता in between, शुभा auspicious, नागवधूरिव like a female elephant, बभूव remained. 
2::55::27::सा अबला that gentle lady, एकैकम् one by one, पादपम् tree, गुल्मम् shrub, अदृष्टपूर्वाम् never seen before, पुष्पशालिनीम् flowering, लतां वा or a creeper, पश्यन्ती seeing, रामम् to Rama, पप्रच्छ asked.
2::55::28::लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, सीतावचनसंरब्धः cheered by the indent of Sita, कुसुमोत्कटान् laden with flowers, रमणीयान् beautiful, बहुविधान् various, पादपान् trees, आनयामास brought. 
2::55::29::तदा then, जनकराजस्य सुता daughter of king Janaka (Sita), विचित्रवालुकजलाम् wonderful water and sand, हंससारसनादिताम् echoing with the sounds of swans and cranes, नदीम् river Yamuna, प्रेक्ष्य beholding, रेमे exceedingly delighted.
2::55::30::तत: then, भ्रातरौ the two brothers, रामलक्ष्मणौ Rama and Lakshmana, क्रोशमात्रम् a krosa, गत्वा having gone, मेध्यान् suitable for sacrifice (pure), बहून् many, मृगान् deer, हत्वा having slain, यमुनावने in the forest on the bank of Yamuna, चेरतु: ate.
2::55::31::अदीनदर्शना: appearing in high spirits, ते they, बर्हिणपूगनादिते resounding with the melody of peacocks, वानरवारणायुते inhabited by monkeys and elephants, शुभे वने in that lovely forest, विहृत्य roaming about, समम् levelled, सम्मतम् convenient, नदीवप्रम् bank of the river, उपेत्य having reached, निवासम् dwelling, आजग्मतु: made.
