2::98::1::On encamping the army, lord Bharata, the best among men, wished to approach on foot Rama who was devoted to his father.
2::98::2::After the army encamped in the assigned places, Bharata said to his brother Satrughna thus:
2::98::3::O dear Satrughna, you should explore this forest quickly along with groups of our people and  hunters as well.
2::98::4::Let Guha, surrounded by a thousand kinsmen and armed with bows, arrows and swords look for Rama.
2::98::5::'I myself shall go on foot surrounded by ministers, citizens, preceptors and brahmins and search the entire forest.
2::98::6::'I shall not rest in peace until I see Rama, powerful Lakshmana and illustrious princess of Videha (Sita).
2::98::7::I shall not attain peace until I see my brother, Rama whose auspicious countenance looks radiant as the Moon and whose eyes as lotuspetals.
2::98::8::Peace shall not come to me until I hold on my head the feet of my brother, the insignia of royalty.
2::98::9::I shall not attain peace until Rama, who is worthy of this kingdom, is sprinkled with the holy water of coronation and assumes the ancestral kingdom.
2::98::10::Lakshmana, one who beholds the highly effulgent countenance of Rama, resembling the spotless Moon and whose eyes resemble red lotuses, is blessed indeed
2::98::11::Sita, the illustrious daughter of Janaka and princess of Videha, has accomplished her purpose by following Rama, the lord of this earth bounded by the ocean.
2::98::12::Like Kubera in the Nandana garden, Rama lives here on mount Chitrakuta which is indeed blessed like the Himalaya, king of the mountains.
2::98::13::Fortunate is this inaccessible forest which is inhabited by wild animals to have become the dwelling place of the most radiant Rama, the foremost among the wielders of weapons.
2::98::14::Having said thus, the best of men, mightyarmed and highly energetic Bharata entered the great forest on foot.
2::98::15::Bharata, the best among the eloquent, made his way amidst multitude of trees grown on mountain slopes with their tops in full bloom.
2::98::16:: Having reached a flowering sala tree atop Chitrakuta mountain, he beheld a lofty banner of smoke rising from the fire burning in Rama's hermitage.
2::98::17::On seeing the smoke, majestic Bharata in the company of relatives concluded that Rama was staying there and rejoiced like a man who had reached the other bank of the river.
2::98::18:: Having heard of Rama's hermitage on the Chitrakuta mountain inhabited by pious men, magnanimous Bharata, commanded his army to stay at a distance, and quickly proceeded with Guha.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टनवतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the ninetyeighth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
