2::66::1::On seeing the king who ascended the heaven just as a blazing fire suddenly extinguishes, or like the ocean emptied of water or the Sun bereft of splendour Kausalya raised the head of the king on to her lap, her eyes filled with tears and body shrunk in sorrow, looked at Kaikeyi and said:    
2::66::2::On seeing the king who ascended the heaven just as a blazing fire suddenly extinguishes, or like the ocean emptied of water or the Sun bereft of splendour Kausalya raised the head of the king on to her lap, her eyes filled with tears and body shrunk in sorrow, looked at Kaikeyi and said:    
2::66::3::O cruel one O perverse wretch, O Kaikeyi, your wishes have been fulfilled. You have forsaken the king, that was your only objective. (Now) enjoy the kingdom alone without any obstacles on your way.
2::66::4::Rama has gone away leaving me. My lord has ascended the heaven, traversing the wrong road. With my wellwishers gone, I do not want to live.
2::66::5:: Which woman wishes to live, leaving her godlike husband, except Kaikeyi who has given up her sense of duty? 
2::66::6::Like a greedy man who eats the (poisonous) kimpaka fruit without realising the defects of the fruit, Kaikeyi has destroyed the Raghu race on account of the hunchback (Manthara).
2::66::7::Hearing the unrighteous action ordered by the king in banishing Rama and his wife  king Janaka will suffer great agony like me.
2::66::8:: That virtuous Rama of lotuspetaleyes has left this place for good, and does not know that I am without a protector, being a widow now.
2::66::9:: In the same way Sita, daughter of the king of Videha, who does not deserve hardships will be in deep agony.  
2::66::10:: Hearing the ghastly sounds of animals and birds, Sita will surely get frightened and take shelter in Rama.
2::66::11::Old and sonless Janaka, constantly thinking of Sita and overpowered with grief will surely give up his life. 
2::66::12::As his faithful wife, I shall enter the fire by clasping this (Dasaratha's) body and go to  death today itself
2::66::13::The servants led away that unfortunate Kausalya who was lamenting in great anguish  embracing the body of Dasaratha. 
2::66::14:: The counsellors, instructed (by Vasistha and others), placed the king's body in an oil tub with the understanding that the funeral rites were to be performed hereafter.
2::66::15::The counsellors who were acquainted with all such matters (relating to the king's funeral) were unwilling to perform the obsequies in the absence of any of the king's sons. Meanwhile, they kept watch over the deadbody of the king.
2::66::16::On seeing the king's body laid in the oil vat by the counsellors, the women cried  Alas, the king is dead.
2::66::17:: With tears flowing down their faces, piteously raising their arms, groaning in their burning grief, the women lamented helplessly. 
2::66::18::When we were already deprived of Rama who was always pleasing and truthful, alas, o great king, why did you leave us? 
2::66::19:: A woman of evil intentions, Kaikeyi, at first separated us from Rama. Now she deprived us of our husband. How can we live with one who is a slayer of her husband?
2::66::20:: Rama, who was always our and your selfpossessed master and protector has gone to the forest, indeed, abandoning royal wealth.
2::66::21::Without you and without the heroic Rama, how can we live overwhelmed with grief and enduring the abuses of Kaikeyi?  
2::66::22::Why will not Kaikeyi who has abandoned the king, valiant Rama and Lakshmana along with Sita cast aside others?
2::66::23::The excellent wives of Dasaratha, overwhelmed with profound grief and tears, are  lying unconcious on the floor. 
2::66::24::Like night without the Moon, like a woman forsaken by her husband, this city of Ayodhya without that magnanimous king has lost its earlier splendour.
2::66::25::With the people of Ayodhya shedding tears, the housewives crying, in anguish, 'alas alas' the courtyards houses and squares of the roads deserted, the city has lost its earlier brilliance.
2::66::26::When king Dasaratha ascended to heaven due to grief over his son and when his wives were lying on the ground, the Sun ceased his journey and the night favourable to creatures of darkness suddenly set in.
2::66::27:: The wellwishers who asembled, unwilling to ignite the funeral pyre of the king in the absence of any one of his sons laid the king's deadbody in that oil trough in an unexpected manner.
2::66::28::The city, bereft of illustrious Dasaratha was filled with people sobbing in the courtyards in front of their houses and in the squares in between. That city of Ayodhya bereft of brightness, appeared like the day without the Sun and the night without constellations of stars.
2::66::29::After the demise of the king, men and women in the city assembled in groups and denounced the mother of Bharata. Extremely distressed, they had no peace of mind. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षट्षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtysixth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
