2::100::1::रामः Rama, जटिलम् wearing matted locks, चीरवसनम् wearing bark robes, प्राञ्जलिम् with folded palms, भुवि on the ground, पतितम् fallen, युगान्ते at the time of dissolution of the world, भास्करं यथा like sun, दुर्दर्शम् difficult to look at, ददर्श beheld. 
2::100::2::रामः Rama, विवर्णवदनम् of pallid countenance, कृशम् emaciated, भ्रातरम् brother, भरतम् Bharata, कथंचित् with great difficulty, अभिविज्ञाय having recognised, बाहूना with his arm,  परिजग्राह caught hold of.
2::100::3::राघवः born in the race of Raghu, रामः Rama, तं भरतम् to that Bharata, मूर्ध्नि on the forehead, आघ्राय having kissed, परिष्वज्य च and also embracing, अङ्के on his lap, आरोप्य making him sit, समाहितः with composed mind, पर्यपृच्छत् enquired. 
2::100::4::तात O dear, त्वम् you, आरण्यम् to the forest, यत् आगतः now that you have come, ते पिता our father, क्व नु where, अभूत् was he, तस्य he, जीवतः while living, त्वम् you, वनम् to the forest, आगन्तुम् to come, न अर्हसि हि does not behove you.
2::100::5::अस्मिन् अरण्ये to this forest, दूरात् from a distance, आगतम् have come, दुष्प्रतीकं of emaciated limbs, भरतम् Bharata, चिरस्य after a long time, पश्यामि I see, बत it is a pity, तात dear brother, वनम् to the forest, किम् why, आगतः did you come?  
2::100::6::तात dear child, त्वम् you, इह now, यत् आगतः that you have come here, राजा king Dasaratha, कच्चिद्दारयते Is he surviving, I trust so?, राजा king Dasaratha, दीनः dejected, सहसा immediately, लोकान्तरम् to the other world, न गतः कच्चित् I hope he did not depart. 
2::100::7::सौम्य O gentle one, बालस्य young ones, ते your, शाश्वतम् permanent, राज्यम् kingdom, न भ्रष्टं कच्चित् I trust it has not been forfeited, तात dear child, सत्यविक्रमम् a man whose prowess is truthfulness, पितरम् father, शुश्रूषसे कच्चित् I trust you are looking after.
2::100::8::सत्यसंङ्गरः who is true to his promise, राजसूयाश्वमेधानाम् Rajasuya and Ashwamedha sacrifices, आहर्ता performer, धर्मनिश्चयः firm adherent of righteousness, राजा दशरथः king Dasaratha, कच्चित् कुशली I trust he is in good health. 
2::100::9::तात dear child, ब्राह्मणः brahmin (versed in the Vedas), विद्वान् learned, धर्मनित्यः ever fixed in virtues, महाद्युतिः effulgent, सः that, इक्ष्वाकूणाम् Ikshvaku's, उपाध्यायः preceptor, यथावत् as usual, पूज्यते कच्चित् I trust he is being honoured. 
2::100::10::तात dear child, सा कौसल्या that Kausalya, सुखिनी कच्चित् trust she is happy, प्रजावती mother of excellent progeny, सुमित्रा च Sumitra too, आर्या noble, देवी queen, कैकयी Kaikeyi, नन्दति कच्चित् I trust she is delightful.
2::100::11::विनयसम्पन्नः one who is endowed with modesty, कुलपुत्रः born of high family, बहुश्रुतः conversant in scriptures, अनसूयुः free from envy, अनुद्रष्टा one who can give directions, पुरोहितः priest, ते to (by) you, सत्कृतः कच्चित् I trust, you honour.
2::100::12::ते your, अग्निषु sacred fires, युक्तः employed, विधिज्ञः knower of ritual precepts, मतिमान्  sagacious, ऋजुः upright, सदा always, हुतं च what was offered as oblation, होष्यमाणं च what is going to be offered as oblation, काले at an appropriate time, वेदयते कच्चित् I trust he informs.
2::100::13::तात dear, देवान् gods, पित्रून् fathers, मात़ृ़: mothers, गुरून् teachers, पितृसमानपि relations equal to your father, वृद्धांश्च aged people, वैद्यांश्च physicians, ब्राह्मणांश्च brahmins, अभिमन्यसे कच्चित् I trust you are paying homage. 
2::100::14::तात dear child, इष्वस्त्रवरसम्पन्नम् he who is furnished with excellent arrows and other weapons, अर्थशास्त्रविशारदम् master in state craft, उपाध्यायम् teacher, सुधन्वानम् Sudhanva, त्वम् you, मन्यसे कच्चित् I hope you pay respect. 
2::100::15::तात O dear, आत्मसमाः men equal to you, शूराः brave men, श्रुतवन्तः learned men, जितेन्द्रियाः men with selfcontrol, कुलीनाश्च men of noble birth, इङ्गितज्ञाश्च men skilled in guessing from hints, ते to you, मन्त्रिणः as ministers, कृताः कच्चित् I hope you have appointed.
2::100::16::राघव O Bharata, शास्त्रकोविदैः by men learned in scriptures, मन्त्रधरैः by those who can withhold proper counselling, अमात्यैः by ministers, सुसंवृतः wellguarded, मन्त्रः advice, राज्ञाम् to the king, विजयमूलम् root of victory, भवति हि will become.  
2::100::17::निद्रावशम् controlled by sleep, नैषीः कच्चित् are you not, I trust, काले at appropriate time, प्रबुध्यसे कच्चित् are awake, I hope, अपररात्रेषु in the early hours, अर्थनैपुणम् about judicious statecraft, चिन्तयसि कच्चित् are you thinking, I trust. 
2::100::18::एकः alone, न मन्त्रयसे कच्चित् you are not planning, I hope, बहुभिस्सह with many, न कच्चित्  hope you are not discussing, मन्त्रितः when decided, ते मन्त्रः that decision, राष्ट्रम् about the kingdom, न परिधावति कच्चित् does not run through, I trust.
2::100::19::राघव O Bharata, लघुमूलम् with a little effort, महोदयम् yielding great result, अर्थम् an endeavour, विनिश्चित्य having determined, क्षिप्रम् quickly, कर्तुम् to execute, आरभसे कच्चित्  are commencing, न दीर्घयसि are not postponing unduly. 
2::100::20::पार्थिवाः other kings, सुकृतान्येव wellaccomplished acts only, पुनः again, कृतरूपाणि वा or almost accomplished, ते your, सर्वकार्याणि all those endeavours, विदुः कच्चित् are informed,  कर्तव्यानि endeavours intended to be performed in future, न are not revealed. 
2::100::21::तातः dear, त्वया वा by you, तव your, अमात्यैर्वा or by ministers, मन्त्रितम् determination, तर्कैः  by conjecture, युक्त्या वा or by inference, ये चापि other means, अपरिकीर्तिताः so far not  been revealed, (with those means or by others), कच्चिन्न बुध्यते I hope are not known.  
2::100::22::मूर्खाणाम् among fools, सहस्रात् in preferance to a thousand, एकम् single, पण्डितम् wise man, इच्चसि कच्चित् I hope are preferring, अर्थकृच्छेषु in difficult situations, पण्डितः a wise man, महत् immense, निश्रेयसम् help, कुर्यात् will render. 
2::100::23::महीपतिः king, मूर्खाणाम् fools, सहस्राणि in thousands, अथवा or else, अयुतान्येव or tens of thousands, उपास्ते यद्यपि even if he seeks assistance, तेषु among them, सहायता help, नास्ति not there.
2::100::24::मेधावी prudent, शूरः brave, दक्षः skilful, विचक्षणः clearsighted man, एकः a single one, अमात्यः अपि even minister, राजानम् the king, राजपुत्रं वा or a prince, श्रियम् prosperity, प्रापयेत् can bring.
2::100::25::मुख्याः important, भृत्याः servants, महत्सु in important, कर्मसु एव in tasks, योजिताः कच्चित् have been employed, I hope, मध्यमाः mediocre men, मध्यमेषु to the mediocre tasks, जघन्याः तु low people, जघन्येषु in the lower tasks, योजिता कच्चित् are employed, I hope.
2::100::26::उपधातीतान् unyielding to bribery and other temptations, पितृपैतामहान् men who hold hereditary positions, शुचीन् full of integrity, श्रेष्ठान् eminent, अमात्यान् ministers, त्वम् you, श्रेष्ठेषु for superior, कर्मसु for tasks, नियोजयसि कच्चित् I hope you are assigning.
2::100::27:: कैकयीसुत O Bharata, उग्रेण by severe, दण्डेन with punishment, भृशम् excessively, तव राष्ट्रम् your kingdom, उद्वेजितप्रजम् citizens being agitated, मन्त्रिणः ministers, नानुजानन्ति कच्चित्  I suppose will not permit so.
2::100::28::याजकाः performers of sacrifice, उग्रप्रतिग्रहीतारम् accepting unmerited charity, पतितं यथा like an outcaste, स्त्रियः women, कामयानम् इव to a lustful one, त्वाम् you, नावजानन्ति कच्चित् hope they are not insulting you.
2::100::29::उपायकुशलम् skilled in contrivances, वैद्यम् learned person, शूरम् warrior, ऐश्वर्यकामं च passionate for wealth, भृत्यसंदूषणे in corrupting the minds of servants and making them revolt against their master, रतम् one who is engaged, यः such man, न हन्ति will not kill, सः that man, हन्यते will be killed.
2::100::30::हृष्टश्च cheerful, शूरश्च brave, मतिमान् sagacious,  धृतिमान् steadfast, शुचिः honest, कुलीनश्च born of good family, अनुरक्तश्च also loyal, दक्षः efficient, सेनापतिः chief of army,  कृतः कच्चित् I hope has been appointed. 
2::100::31::बलवन्तः powerful, युध्दविशारदाः skilled in war, दृष्टापदानाः men with proven  herioc exploits, विक्रान्ताः courageous men, ते मुख्याः those prominent soldiers, त्वया by you, सत्कृत्य having honoured, मानिताः कच्चित् I hope they are respected. 
2::100::32::बलस्य of the army, दातव्यम् to be given, भक्तं च food (rations), यथोचितम् suitable, वेतनं च wages, सम्प्राप्तकालम् in due time, ददासि कच्चित् I trust you are paying, न विलम्बसे not delaying.
2::100::33::भृताः (dependent) attendants, भक्तवेतनयोः regarding food materials and wages, कालातिक्रमणात् beyond stipulated time, भर्तुः about the masters, कुप्यन्ति will be incensed, दुष्यन्ति will become corrupted, सः that one, सुमहान् very great, अनर्थः calamity, स्मृतः has been stated in the scriptures.
2::100::34::सर्वे all men, प्रधानतः especially, कुलपुत्राः men of our family, त्वाम् to you, अनुरक्ताः कच्चित् I hope they are loyal, समाहिताः men with steady mind, तव अर्थेषु for your cause, प्राणान् life, कच्चित् सन्त्यजन्ति I hope are ready to sacrifice. 
2::100::35::भरत O Bharata, जानपदः one who is born in your country, विद्वान् wellinformed, दक्षिणः favourable, प्रतिभानवान् one with quick understanding, यथोक्तवादी one who repeats, पण्डितः expert man, ते to (by) you, दूत: as envoy, कृतः कच्चित् I hope has been chosen.
2::100::36::अन्येषु on enemy's side, अष्टादश eighteen, तीर्थानि officials by close watch, स्वपक्षे on your side, दश पञ्च च ten plus five (fifteen), अविज्ञातैः by those unrecognisable by others, त्रिभिः त्रिभिः three for each official, चारकैः spies, वेत्सि कच्चित् I hope you acquire information. 
2::100::37::रिपुसूदन O slayer of foes, व्यपास्तान् defeated, प्रतियातांश्च having gone back, दुर्बलान् weak, अहितान् foes, सर्वदा at all times, अनवज्ञाय without neglecting, वर्तसे कच्चित् I hope you remain alert. 
2::100::38::तात O dear child, लौकायतिकान् thinking of this world only, those atheists, ब्राह्मणान्  brahmins, न सेवसे कच्चित् I hope you are not keeping company, पण्डितमानिनः fancying         them as learned, बालाः foolish, एते these people, अनर्थकुशलाः हि adept in bringing disaster indeed.
2::100::39::दुर्बुधाः these superficial fellows, मुख्येषु among the principal, धर्मशास्त्रेषु in scriptures, विद्यमानेषु while existing, आन्वीक्षिकीम् relating to the science of logic, बुद्धिम् intelligence, प्राप्य having obtained, निरर्थम् futile, प्रवदन्ति argue.
2::100::40::ताता O dear child, वीरैः by the heroic, अस्माकम् our, पूर्वकैः by ancestors, पूर्वम् formerly, अध्युषिताम् inhabited, सत्यनामाम् true to its name, दृढद्वाराम् with sturdy gates, हस्त्यश्वरथसङ्कुलाम् full of elephants, horses and chariots, सदा always, स्वकर्मनिरतैः engaged in their respective professions, जितेन्द्रियैः by selfcontrolled men, महोत्साहैः by  highly energetic men, आर्यैः by venerable men, सहस्रशः in their thousands, ब्राह्मणैः by brahmins, क्षत्रियैः by kshatriyas (warriors), वैश्यैः by vaisyas (merchants), वृतम् surrounded, विविधाकारैः of various kinds, प्रासादैः with palaces, वृताम् filled with, वैद्यजनाकुलाम् full of learned people, सुमुदिताम् with everything available, स्फीताम् prosperous, अयोध्याम् Ayodhya, परिरक्षसि कच्चित् I trust you are protecting. 
2::100::41::राघव O Bharata, चैत्यशतैः by hundreds of sanctuaries near villages, जुष्ट: furnished,  सुनिविष्टजनाकुलः filled with people where life is made comfortable, देवस्थानैः with shrines, प्रपाभिश्च with centres for providing water, तटाकैश्च with tanks, उपशोभितः graced with, सुकृष्टसीमा wellploughed land, पशुमान् with excellent cattle, हिंसाभिः with violence, परिवर्जितः abandoned, अदेवमातृकः not dependant on rain, रम्यः enchanting, श्वापदैः with wild animals, परिवर्जितः devoid of, सर्वैः by all kinds, भयैः of fears, परित्यक्तः expelled, खनिभिश्च with mines, उपशोभितः adorned with, पापैः by sinful, नरैः with people, विवर्जितः deserted,  मम my, पूर्वैः by ancestors, सुरक्षितः wellprotected, जनपद: country, स्फीतः कच्चित् I trust is prosperous, सुखम् comfortably, वसति कच्चित् I hope they are living.
2::100::42::तात dear child, सर्वे all men, कृषिगोरक्षजीविनः those who live on agriculture and cattlerearing, ते to you, दयिता कच्चित् I trust are favourable, वार्तायाम् in profession (of cattle raising), संश्रितः depending on, लोकः world, सुखम् happily, एधते हि grows.
2::100::43::गुप्तिपरीहारैः by affording protection and through prevention of adversities, तेषाम् their, भरणम् maintenance, ते to you (by you), कृतं कच्चित् has been done, I hope, राज्ञा by the king, विषयवासिनः those living in the country, सर्वे all, धर्मेण with righteousness, रक्ष्याः हि are  required to be protected. 
2::100::44:: स्त्रियः women, सान्त्वयसि कच्चित् I hope you are pacifying, ताः they, ते to (by) you, सुरक्षिताः कच्चित् I trust they are  guarded well, आसाम् words of the women, न श्रद्धास्यासां कच्चित् I trust you believe not, गुह्यम् secret, न भाषसे कच्चित् I trust you do not divulge.
2::100::45::नागवनम् habitat of elephants, गुप्तं कच्चित् I trust is protected, ते to you, धेनुकाः milch cows, सन्ति कच्चित् I trust you have, गणिकाश्वानाम् mares, कुञ्जराणांच elephants, न तृप्यसि कच्चित् I trust you are not contented.
2::100::46::राजपुत्र O prince नित्यम् daily, पूर्वाह्णे early in the morning, उत्थायोत्थाय rising early, महापथे on the thoroughfare, मानुष्याणाम् to the people, विभूषितम् welladorned, दर्शयसे कच्चित् I trust you are presenting yourself.
2::100::47::सर्वे all, कर्मान्ताः servants, ते to you, अविशङ्कया without fear, न प्रत्यक्षाः कच्चित् I trust do not present themselves, सर्वे all, उत्सृष्टाः वा पुनः or again (I trust) are not kept in a distance, अत्र here, मध्यमेव middle course, कारणम् reason for welfare of all the workers. 
2::100::48::सर्वाणि all, दुर्गाणि the forts, धनधान्यायुधोदकैः with wealth, grains, weapons and water, यन्त्रैश्च with ammunitions or machines of war, तथा similarly, शिल्पिधनुर्धरैः with craftsmen and archers, परिपूर्णानि कच्चित् are adequately provided, I trust. 
2::100::49::राघव O Bharata, ते your, आयः revenues, विपुलः कच्चित् are abundant, I trust, व्ययः expenditure, अल्पतरः कच्चित् is much less, I hope, ते your, कोशः treasury, अपात्रेषु to  undeserving people, न गच्छति कच्चित् does not pass, I trust. 
2::100::50::ते your, व्ययः expenditure, देवतार्थे च for the sake of the gods, पित्रर्थे for the sake of ancestors, ब्राह्मणाभ्यागतेषु for brahmins and guests, योधेषु on warriors, मित्रवर्गेषु on hordes of friends, गच्छति कच्चित् is being spent I hope.
2::100::51::विशुद्धात्मा of purehearted man, आर्यः venerable one, शुचिः honest, अपकर्मणा with  unworthy act, क्षारितः falsely accused of adultery, शास्त्रकुशलैः by those wellversed in scriptures, अपृष्टः without consulting, लोभात् out of avarice, न वध्यते कच्चित् I trust is not slain. 
2::100::52::नरर्षभ O best among men, काले at the time of committing theft, दृष्टः who has been caught redhanded, गृहीतश्चैव one who is arrested, पृष्टश्च one who has been interrogated, सकारणः one who has sufficient evidence, चोरः thief, धनलोभात् out of greed for money, न मुच्यते  कच्चित् I hope is not set free. 
2::100::53::राघव O Bharata, बहुश्रुताः wellinformed, तव अमात्याः your ministers, आढ्यस्य of a rich man, दुर्गतस्य च to a poorman, व्यसने in times of hardship, अर्थम् any matter, विरागाः impartially, पश्यन्ति कच्चित् I trust they look at impartially.
2::100::54::राघव Bharata, मिथ्याभिशस्तानाम् of those who are falsely accused, यानि अश्रूणि those tears, पतन्ति fall, तानि they, प्रीत्यर्थम् for the sake of pleasure, अनुशासतः one who commands,  पुत्रान्पशून् his sons and cattle, घ्नन्ति they will destroy. 
2::100::55::राघव Bharata, वृद्धांश्च the old, बालांश्च the children, वैद्यमुख्यांश्च foremost of learned people, दानेन with gifts, मनसा with affection, वाचा with kind words, एतैः these, त्रिभिः with  three,  बुभूषसे कच्चित् I trust you thrive. 
2::100::56::गुरूंश्च prceptors, वृद्धांश्च the old, तापसान् the ascetics, देवतातिथीन् gods and guests, चैत्यांश्च shrines, सिध्दार्थान् acomplished men, ब्राह्मणांश्च brahmins, सर्वान् all, नमस्यसि कच्चित् I trust you are paying homage. 
2::100::57::अर्थेन with prosperity, धर्मं वा or righteousness, धर्मेण with righteousness, अर्थं वा prosperity, पुनः again, प्रीतिलोभेन longing for pleasure, कामेन with desire for sensual enjoyment, उभौ both, न बाधसे कच्चित् I trust you are not thwarting.
2::100::58::जयताम् among the victorious, वर best, कालज्ञ one having the knowledge of time, वरद granter of boons (best of men), धर्मंच righteousness, कामंच legitimate pleasure, सर्वान् all of them, काले proper time, विभज्य dividing time for each, सेवसे कच्चित् I trust you are attending.
2::100::59::महाप्राज्ञ O highly sagacious one, सर्वशास्त्रार्थ कोविदाः those who can comprehend the meaning of all scriptures, ब्राह्मणाः brahmins, पौरजानपदैस्सह along with the inhabitants of the city and country too, ते your, शर्म happiness, आशंसन्ते कच्चित् I trust they are seeking.
2::100::60::नास्तिक्यम् atheism, अनृतम् falsehood, क्रोधम् anger, प्रमादम् inattention, दीर्घसूत्रताम्   procrastination, ज्ञानवताम् wise people's, अदर्शनम् evasion, आलस्यम् indolence, पञ्चवृत्तिताम् gratification of all five senses, अर्थानाम् relating to the affairs (of the kingdom), एकचिन्तनम् thinking alone, अनर्थज्ञैः by those proficient in worthless acts, मन्त्रणम् consultation, निश्चितानाम् of acts decided upon, अनारम्भम् not to implement, मन्त्रस्य counsel, अपरिरक्षणम् not protecting, मङ्लादि beginning of an auspicious note and the like, अप्रयोगं च not to practise, सर्वतः on all sides, प्रत्युत्थानं च attacking all the enemies at a time, एतान् all these, चतुर्दश fourteen, राजदोषान् defects of the king, त्वम् you, वर्जयसि कच्चित् I trust you eschew.
2::100::61::महाप्राज्ञः O highly sagacious, राघवः Bharata, दशपञ्चचतुर्वर्गान् the fifteen of the fourfold  divisions, सप्तवर्गं च the seven divisions, अष्टवर्गम् the eight divisions, त्रिवर्गं च the three  divisions, तिस्र: three, विद्याः च kinds of knowledge, इन्द्रियाणाम् of the senses, जयम् victory over, षाडगुण्यम् six qualities, दैवमानुषम् evils arising from destiny and human agency, कृत्यम् kritya, विंशतिवर्गं च division of twenty, तथा similarly, प्रकृतिमण्डलम् Prakriti and Mandalas, यात्रादण्डविधानं च practices of yatra and chastisement, द्वियोनिः two sources of, सन्धि विग्रहौ peace and war, तत्त्वतः the true nature, बुध्द्या by intellect, एतान् alone, यथावत् appropriately, अनुमन्यसे कच्चित् I trust you follow. 
2::100::62::त्वम् you, यथोद्दिष्टैः as adumbrated in sacred texts, चतुर्भिः by four, त्रिभिरेव वा or three, मन्त्रिभिः with counsellors, समस्तै: together, व्यस्तैश्च separately with each one, मिथ: in secrecy, मन्त्रम्  counsel, मन्त्रयसे कच्चित् I trust you deliberate. 
2::100::63::ते your knowledge of, वेदाः Vedas, सफलाः कच्चित् I trust is fruitful, ते क्रियाः your acts,  सफला कच्चित् I trust are productive, ते दाराः your wife, सफलाः कच्चित् I trust is useful, ते श्रुतम् the scriptures you have heard, सफलं कच्चित् I trust, is useful. 
2::100::64::राघव O Bharata, ते बुद्धि: your intellect, आयुष्या is enhancing your life span, यशस्या च augmenting your fame, धर्मकामार्थ संहिता in accordance with righteousness, (legitimate) pleasure and prosperity, मम to (by) me, यथा as, उक्ता said, एषैव कच्चित् I trust it is in conformity with that. 
2::100::65::तातः our father, याम् वृत्तिम् whichever course, वर्तते is following, याम् which course, नः our, प्रपितामहाः followed by ancestors, या च सत्पथगा which one walks the path of truth, शुभा auspicious, ताम् that, वृत्तिम् course, वर्तसे कच्चित् I trust, you follow. 
2::100::66::राघव Bharata, स्वादुकृतम् prepared deliciously, भोज्यम् food, एकः alone, नाश्नासि कच्चित् I  trust you are not partaking, अशंसमानेभ्यः to those who desire them, मित्रेभ्यः to friends, सम्प्रयच्छसि कच्चित् I trust you are giving it. 
2::100::67::महामति: one who has great wisdom, विद्वान् learned man, राजा तु as for the king, कृत्स्नां entire, वसुधाम् earth, अवाप्य having acquired, प्रजानाम् for people, दण्डधरः holding Danda in hand, यथावत् in accordance with tradition, धर्मेण righteously, पालयित्वा having ruled, इतः  from here, च्युतः having been released, स्वर्गम् heaven, उपैति हि will ascend.
