2::81::1::ततः thereafter, वाग्विशेषज्ञाः experts in conversation, सूतमागधाः bards and panegyrists, नान्दीमुखीम् with an auspicious start, रात्रिम् the night, मङ्गलसंहितैः filled with an auspicious notes, स्तवैः praises, भरतम् Bharata, तुष्टुवुः pleased.
2::81::2::सुवर्णकोणाभिहतः beaten by golden sticks, यामदुन्दुभिः the drums of the nightwatch (to indicate watchers of the night), प्राणदत् was struck, शङ्खांश्च conches, उच्चावचस्वरान् of various modulations, नादांश्च sounds, शतशः in hundreds, दध्मुः people blew. 
2::81::3::सुमहान् shrill, सः that, तूर्यघोषः sound of trumpets, दिवम् the heaven, आपूरयन्निव as if filling, शोकसंतप्तम् griefstricken, भरतम् Bharata, भूयः still more, शोकैः with sorrows, अरन्ध्रयत् filled.
2::81::4::ततः then, प्रबुद्ध: awakened, भरतः Bharata, अहम् I, राजा king, न not, इति thus, उक्त्वा having said, तम् घोषम् that sound, सन्निवर्त्य च having stopped, शत्रुघ्नम् to Satrughna, इदम् these words, अब्रवीत् said. 
2::81::5::शत्रुघ्न O Satrughna, पश्य see, कैकेय्या by Kaikeyi, लोकस्य to the people, महत् great, अपकृतम् harm has been done, राजा king, दशरथः Dasaratha, दुःखानि all sufferings, मयि in me, विसृज्य having left, गतः went.
2::81::6::धर्मराजस्य of righteous king, तस्य his, महात्मनः noble one's, धर्ममूला rooted in  righteousness, एषा such, राज्यश्रीः the goddess of kingdom, जले in water, आकर्णिका without helmsman, नौः इव like a boat, परिभ्रमति is revolving. 
2::81::7::यः whoever, नः for us, सुमहान् great, नाथः protector, सः (राघवः) अपि that Rama also, अनया this, मे मात्रा by my mother, धर्मम् virtuous conduct, उत्सृज्य having abandoned, स्वयम् herself, वनम् forest, प्रव्राजितः has been banished. 
2::81::8::तदा then, इत्येवम् in this way, विलपन्तम् lamenting, विचेतनम् lying unconscious, भरतम् Bharata, प्रेक्ष्य having seen, सर्वाः all, योषितः women, सस्वरम् in one voice, कृपणम् piteously, रुरुदुः cried loudly.
2::81::9::तस्मिन् that Bharata, तथा in that way, विलपति lamenting, राजधर्मवित् conversant with royal traditions, महायशाः illustrious man, वसिष्ठः Vasistha, इक्ष्वाकुनाथस्य of the lord of Iksvakus (king Dasaratha's), सभाम् assembly hall, प्रविवेश entered.
2::81::10::धर्मात्मा righteous, सगणः along with his disciples, शातकुम्भमयीम् with gold finishing, रम्याम् lovely, मणिरत्नसमाकुलाम् inlaid with gems and precious stones, सुधर्मामिव like Sudharma, (the assembly hall of Indra), प्रत्यपद्यत reached. 
2::81::11::सर्ववेदज्ञः wellversed in all the Vedas, सः Vasistha, सुखास्तरणसंवृतम् covered with comfortable spread, काञ्चनमयम् made of gold, पीठम् seat, अध्यास्त sat, दूतान् messengers, अनुशशास च ordered too.
2::81::12::अव्यग्राः with a steady mind, ब्राह्मणान् brahmins, क्षत्रियान् kshatriyas, वैश्यान् Vaisyas, अमात्यान् ministers, गणवल्लभान् army commanders, क्षिप्रम् at once, आनयत fetch, नः for us,  आत्ययिकम् of great urgency, कृत्यं हि work to be done.
2::81::13::सराजभृत्यम् along with royal attendants, शत्रुघ्नम् Satrughna, यशस्विनम् the illustious one, भरतं च Bharata too, युधाजितम् Yudhajit, सुमन्त्रं च Sumantra also, तत्र there, हिताः well wishers of the king, ये जनाः all those people. 
2::81::14::ततः then, रथैः with chariots, अश्वैः on horses, गजैश्चापि on elephants, उपगच्छताम् of those arriving, जनानाम् people's, सुमहान् great, हलहला शब्दः tumultuous sound, समपद्यत arose. 
2::81::15::ततः then, आयान्तम् approaching, भरतम् Bharata, प्रकृतयः ministers and other subjects, दशरथम् Dasaratha, यथा like, तथा like, अमराः gods, शतक्रतुमिव like Indra, the performer of hundred sacrifices, प्रत्यनन्दन् greeted. 
2::81::16::दशरथसुतशोभिता graced by the son of Dasaratha, सभा assembly hall, सदशरथा इव as if Dasaratha was present, तिमिनाग संवृतः filled with whales and serpents, मणिसङ्खशर्करः with gems, shells, pebbles and grains of sand, स्तिमितजलः with placid water, ह्रद इव like a lake, यथापुरा as of yore, बभौ shone. 
