2::88::1::भरतः Bharata, तत् सर्वम् all that, निपुणम् attentively, श्रुत्वा having listened, मन्त्रिभिस्सह along with ministers, इङ्गुदीमूलम् to the foot of the ingudi tree, आगम्य having reached, ताम्  रामशय्याम् that Rama's bed, अवेक्ष gazing, सर्वाः all, जननीः mothers, अब्रवीत् said, तेन महात्मना by that magnanimous, Rama, इह here, भूमौ on the ground, शर्वरी night, शयिता has been slept, अस्य his, विमर्दितम् crushed bed, इदम् this one.
2::88::2::भरतः Bharata, तत् सर्वम् all that, निपुणम् attentively, श्रुत्वा having listened, मन्त्रिभिस्सह along with ministers, इङ्गुदीमूलम् to the foot of the ingudi tree, आगम्य having reached, ताम्  रामशय्याम् that Rama's bed, अवेक्ष gazing, सर्वाः all, जननीः mothers, अब्रवीत् said, तेन महात्मना by that magnanimous, Rama, इह here, भूमौ on the ground, शर्वरी night, शयिता has been slept, अस्य his, विमर्दितम् crushed bed, इदम् this one.
2::88::3::महाभागकुलीनेन by the highborn, महाभागेन by a highly fortunate man, धीमता by the sagacious, दशरथेन by Dasaratha, जातः born, रामः Rama, उर्व्याम् on the naked earth, स्वप्तुम् to sleep, न अर्हति does not deserve.
2::88::4::पुरुषव्याघ्रः best among men, Rama, अजिनोत्तरसंस्तीर्णे on over spreads of deer skin,          वरास्तरणसंचये on bed made of a pile of excellent spreads, शयित्वा used to sleep, महीतले on the ground, कथम् how, शेते can sleep?
2::88::5::परन्तपः scorcher of enemies, (सः that Rama), सर्वदा always, प्रासादाग्रविमानेषु वलभीषु च in the attic of the sevenstoreyed mansion, हैमराजतभौमेषु the floors paved with gold and silver, वरास्तरणशालिषु spread with excellent carpets, पुष्पसंचयचित्रेषु decked with bouquets of flowers, चन्दनागरुगन्धिषु perfumed with sandal and agaru, पाण्डुराभ्रप्रकाशेषु brightness like white clouds, शुकसङ्घरुतेषु च echoed with cries of flocks of parrots, शीतवत्सु cool, सुगन्धिषु in places fragrant with perfumes, कृतकाञ्चनभित्तिषु surrounded by goldplated walls, मेरुकल्पेषु like mount Meru, प्रासादवरवर्येषु in the best of mansions, उषित्वा having dwelt, गीतवादित्रनिर्घोषैः with the sounds of songs and musical instruments, वराभरणनिस्वनैः with the tinkling of ornaments, मृदङ्गवरशब्दैश्च and with excellent sounds of drums, (तत्र there), प्रतिबोधितः awakened, बहुभिः by many, सूतमागधैः bards and genealogists, वन्दिभिः by the panegyrists  गाथाभिः with ballads, अनुरूपाभिः by worthy, स्तुतिभिश्च by songs of praise, काले at appointed time, वन्दितः saluted in reverence.
2::88::6::लोके in the world, इदम् this, अश्रद्धेयम् can not be believed, सत्यम् truly, मा to me, न प्रतिभाति does not appear, मे my, भावः thought (mind), मुह्यते खलु is bewildered, अयम् this, स्वप्नः इति like a dream, मे my, मतिः thinking. 
2::88::7::दैवतम् divine power, कालेन in course of time, किंचित् even a little, बलवत्तरम् more strong, न not, नूनम् surely, यत्र where, सः दाशरथि: that Dasaratha's son, रामः Rama, भूमावेव on the ground itself, शयीत had to sleep.
2::88::8::विदेहराजस्य king of Videha, सुता daughter, प्रियदर्शना one who causes delight to the beholder, दशरथस्य Dasaratha's, दयिता beloved, स्नुषा च daughterinlaw also, सीता च Sita too, भूमौ on the ground, शयिता rested.
2::88::9::इयम् this, मम भ्रातुः my brother's, शय्या couch, इदम् here, परिवर्तितं हि tossed about, कठिने on a hard, स्थण्डिले earth, सर्वम् entire, तृणम् grass, गात्रैः by his limbs, विमृदितम् is crushed.
2::88::10::सीता Sita, अस्मिन् this, शयनोत्तमे on excellent bed, साभरणा with her jewellery, सुप्ता must have slept, मन्ये I think, तत्र तत्र here and there, सक्ताः stuck to, कनकबिन्दवः particles of gold dust, दृश्यन्ते are seen.
2::88::11::तदा then, सीतया by Sita, उत्तरीयम् upper garment, इह here, आसक्तम् had been, सुव्यक्तम् is  is well evident, तथाहि as for instance, सक्ताः stuck, एते कौशेयतन्तवः these silken threads, प्रकाशन्ते are shining.  
2::88::12::येन for what reason, बाला the young lady, तपस्विनी unfortunate, सुकुमारी delicate lady, सती chaste lady, मैथिली Sita, दुःखम् suffering, न हि (वि)जानाति does not know, for that reason, भर्तुः husband's, शय्या bed, सुखा comfortable, मन्ये I think. 
2::88::13::हा हन्त Alas, what a difficulty, अहम् I, नृशंसः अस्मि I have been cruel, यत् since, मम कृते  because of me, राघवः Rama, सभार्यः with his spouse, अनाथवत् like an orphan, ईदृशीम् such, शय्याम् bed, अधिशेते is reclining upon. 
2::88::14::सार्वभौमकुले in the house of emperors, जातः was born, सर्वलोकस्य of the entire world, सम्मतः worthy of reverence, सर्वलोकप्रियः beloved of all the worlds, इन्दीवरश्यामः with the complexion of a blue lotus, रक्ताक्षः of reddened eyes, प्रियदर्शनः pleasing to look, सुखभागी worthy of happiness, न दुःखार्हः does not deserve suffering, राघवः Rama, राज्यम् kingdom, अनुत्तमम् excellent, सुखम् comforts, त्यक्त्वा having given up, भुवि on this ground, कथम् how, शयितः did he sleep?
2::88::15::यः that, विषमे in adverse, काले times, भ्रातरम् brother, रामम् Rama, अनुवर्तते is accompanying, शुभलक्षणः a man of auspicious virtues, महाभागः a great man, लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, धन्यः खलु is indeed fortunate.
2::88::16::या that Sita, वनम् to the forest, पतिम् husband, अनुगता had followed, वैदेही Sita, सिद्धार्था खलु has surely acomplished her object, महात्मना by the magnanimous, तेन by that Rama, हीनाः bereft of, वयम् we, सर्वे all, संशयिताः are full of doubts.
2::88::17::दशरथे Dasaratha, स्वर्गम् to heaven, गते having ascended, रामे च when Rama too, अरण्यम् forest, आश्रिते having taken shelter, पृथिवी earth, आकर्णधारा without helmsman, नौः इव like a ship, मा to me, प्रतिभाति appears.
2::88::18::वने in the forest, वसतः अपि though residing, तस्य his, बाहुवीर्याभिरक्षिताम् protected by the might of his arms, वसुन्धराम् this earth, कश्चित् none, मनसापि even in thought, न च प्रार्थयते does not desire. 
2::88::19::शून्यसंवरणारक्षां without guards to keep vigil over the ramparts, अयन्त्रितहयद्विपाम् with horses and elephants are not in control, अपावृतपुरद्वाराम् with the city gates kept wide open, अरक्षिताम् unprotected, अप्रहृष्टबलाम् unhappy army, शून्याम् empty (demoralised), विषमस्थाम् in dire difficulties, अनावृताम् wide open, राजधानीम् the capital city (Ayodhya), शत्रवः enemies, विषकृतान् mixed with poison, भक्षानिव like food, नाभिमन्यन्ते will not think of. 
2::88::20::अद्य प्रभृति from today, अहम् I, जटाचीराणि matted hair and robes made of bark, धारयन् wearing, नित्यम् always, फलमूलाशनः eating fruits and roots, भूमौ तु on the ground itself, तृणेषु वा or on the grass, शयिष्ये I will sleep. 
2::88::21::तम् Rama's, प्रतिश्रवम् vow, आमुच्य casting on me, उत्तरं कालम् the rest of his term (of exile), तस्य अर्थम् on account of him, वने in the forest, सुखम् cheerfully, निवत्स्यामि shall dwell, अस्य his vow, मिथ्या untrue, न भविष्यति shall not become. 
2::88::22::शत्रुघ्नः Satrughna, भ्रातुः अर्थाय on behalf of my  brother Rama, वसन्तम् living (in the forest), मा me, अनुवत्स्यति will live by following me, आर्यः esteemed brother, लक्ष्मणेन सह along with Lakshmana, अयोध्याम् Ayodhya, पालयिष्यति हि will rule.
2::88::23::द्विजातयः brahmins, काकुत्स्थम् to Rama, अयोध्यायाम् in Ayodhya, अभिषेक्ष्यन्ति will crown him, देवताः gods, इमम् this, मे my, मनोरथम् desire, सत्यम् as true, अपि कुर्युः will they make it? 
2::88::24::मया by me, स्वयम् personally, बहुप्रकारम् in many ways, शिरसा bowing down my head, प्रसाद्यमानः seeking his grace, न प्रपत्स्यते यदि if it is not granted, ततः then, वने चरन् living in the forest, राघवम् Rama, चिराय for a long time, अनुवत्स्यामि will live along him, माम् me, उपेक्षितुम् to ignore, नार्हति he cannot. 
