2::48::1:: The people afflicted with sorrow followed Rama and returned to the city deeply distressed. Eyes overflowing with tears, they longed for death. Smitten with grief, they lost their highmindedness and looked as if their life had been drained out.
2::48::2:: The people afflicted with sorrow followed Rama and returned to the city deeply distressed. Eyes overflowing with tears, they longed for death. Smitten with grief, they lost their highmindedness and looked as if their life had been drained out.
2::48::3::The subjects reached their respective homes  and surrounded by their sons and wives  broke down their faces flooded with tears. 
2::48::4::The people had no joy in life nor did they find cheer in anything. The merchants did not offer their wares for sale. The marketplace looked graceless (lifeless). (The stocks were empty). The householders did not cook their food.
2::48::5::Neither loss nor acquisition of wealth mattered (to the people). No mother rejoiced over getting her firstborn son. 
2::48::6::In every house, women wept and in anguish heaped abuses on their husbands on their arrival at home with words (sharp) like goads on elephants:
2::48::7:: For those who do not see Rama, of what use are the houses or spouses or sons or fortunes or delight? 
2::48::8::Lakshmana is the only fortunate person in the world who has followed Rama of the Kakutstha race along with Sita to serve them.
2::48::9::The rivers and the lotuspools have done some meritorious acts in the past as a result of which Rama having plunged into their holy waters will make his ablution. 
2::48::10::Forests with beautiful groves rivers with vast expanse of waters, mountains with their slopes will enhance the lustre of the scion of the Kakutsthas (Rama).
2::48::11::Whichever hill or forest Rama visits, people will receive him there like a welcome  guest and will not fail to render hospitality to him.
2::48::12::Trees with bunches of cololurful flowers and clusters of blossoms hovering over with black bees will present themselves to the son of the Raghus (Rama).
2::48::13:: The hills will exhibit their excellent flowers and fruits off season out of compassion in order to welcome Rama. 
2::48::14::The mountains, displaying various wonderful streams here and there, will flow with pellucid waters (for Rama).
2::48::15::The trees on the mountain summits will enchant Rama. Where Rama goes, there will be no room for fear or dishonour. 
2::48::16::Before that valiant, strongarmed son of Dasaratha goes too far away (from us), we should follow him.
2::48::17::The shadow of the feet of this magnanimous lord will give us happiness. He alone is the goal and protector of all these people. He is the supreme refuge.
2::48::18::We will serve Sita. You will serve Rama. Such were the words of the distressed women of the city to their husbands. (They continued).
2::48::19::In the forest, Rama will look after your wellbeing and Sita will ensure our, women folk's security. 
2::48::20::The people here are choked with grief. Who will like to stay here where life is disagreeable, cheerless, full of despondency and distress?
2::48::21::If Kaikeyi rules this kingdom unethically, we do not want to live here like orphans. What is the use of our progeny or property (in such a place)? 
2::48::22:: Can Kaikeyi, who has brought disgrace to the race by abandoning her husband and son for the sake of wealth, spare others? 
2::48::23:: We swear on our sons that as long as Kaikeyi lives, or we live, we will never stay in her kingdom as servants.
2::48::24:: Who can live with pleasure under the rule of Kaikeyi of  unrighteous character and wicked behaviour, one who without compassion banished Rama, son of Dasaratha, king of kings?
2::48::25::The entire kingdom, for the sake of Kaikeyi, is under a great calamity. With no support or leader it will definitely go to ruin. 
2::48::26::Now that Rama has been banished, the king will not live (long). After his death there will be evidently only lamentations. 
2::48::27:: Where you are in deep trouble with merits exhausted, it is better to take poison, or follow Rama or walk into the unknown. 
2::48::28:: Rama along with Sita and Lakshmana has been deceitfully exiled and all of us delivered to Bharata like beasts to a butcher (for protection).
2::48::29::Rama, elder brother to Lakshmana is a tiger among men, a subduer of enemies, powerful like an intoxicated elephant, and a great charioteer. Blue in complexion, he has a face like the full Moon. He has lotuslike eyes, kneelong arms and fleshy clavicles. Endowed with a sweet nature, he always speaks the truth and the first to speak to others. When he roams the forest, charming like the Moon and pleasing to the whole world, he will surely make it look graceful. 
2::48::30::Such was the lamentation of the women of the city. Overcome with grief as if frightened at the approach of death, they wept bitterly. 
2::48::31::As the women of the city were thus lamenting over the scion of the Raghus (Rama) (sitting) at home, the sun set. Night fell. 
2::48::32::With sacrificial fires extinguished and the reading of holy scriptures and sacred recitations stopped, Ayodhya looked as if besmeared with darkness.
2::48::33::With markets closed, the city of Ayodhya cheerless and shelterless looked like the sky without stars.
2::48::34::The women grieved over Rama as if a son or a brother had been exiled. Depressed and distressed, they wept and sobbed. For them, Rama was indeed more than their sons.
2::48::35::With the cessation of singing, celebrations, dance and music, there was no rejoicing in the city. The markets displaying merchandise were shut down. The city of Ayodhya looked like the ocean with its waters diminished.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टचत्वारिशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyeighth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
