2::1::1::मातुलकुलम्  maternal uncle's house, गच्छता  set out, भरतेन by Bharata, तदा then, अनघ: sinless one, नित्यशत्रुघ्न: one who is always successful in destroying foes, शत्रुघ्न: Satrughna, प्रीतिपुरस्कृत:  endowed with affection, नीत: taken.
2::1::2::स: he (Bharata), अश्वपतिना by the lord of horses (here, by Aswapati), मातुलेन by his maternal uncle, सत्कारसत्कृत: treated with warm hospitality, पुत्रस्नेहेन with filial affection, लालित: was treated, भ्रात्रा सह along with his brother, तत्र there, न्यवसत् stayed on.
2::1::3::वीरौ heroes, भ्रातरौ both brothers, तत्र there, निवसन्तौ while living, कामत: of their own accord, तर्प्यमाणौ चापि even though satisfied, वृद्धम् aged, दशरथं नृपम् king Dasaratha, स्मरताम् (constanly) remembered.
2::1::4::महातेजा: brilliant, राजापि the king also, महेन्द्रवरुणोपमौ  equal to great Indra and Varuna, प्रोषितौ who were away from home, सुतौ sons, भरतशत्रुघ्नौ उभौ both Bharata and Satrughna, सस्मार remembered.
2::1::5::चत्वार: four, पुरुषर्षभा: bull among men, सर्वे एव तु all of them, तस्य his, स्वशरीरात् from his body, निर्वृत्ता: originated, चत्वार: four, बाहव: इव just as arms, इष्टा: dear
2::1::6::भूतानाम् to all living beings, स्वयम्भूरिव like the Selfborn (Brahma), तेषामपि among them also, गुणवत्तरः  virtuous, महातेजा: effulgent, राम: Rama, पितु: to the father, रतिकर: was a source of delight, बभूव became.
2::1::7::सनातन: the eternal, विष्णु: Visnu, उदीर्णस्य रावणस्य arrogant Ravana's, वधार्थिभि: by those desirous of slaying, देवै: by devatas, अर्थित: entreated, मानुषे लोके in the mortal world, स:  he (Rama), जज्ञे हि was born indeed.
2::1::8::अमिततेजसा of boundless energy, पुत्रेण with son, तेन by him, कौशल्या Kausalya, देवानां वरेण with the excellent among the devatas, वज्रपाणिना with the wielder of the thunderbolt (Indra), अदितिर्यथा like Aditi, शुशुभे looked splendid.
2::1::9::स: he (Rama), रूपोपपन्न: च handsome too, वीर्यवान् energetic, अनसूयक: free from envy, गुणै: by virtues, दशरथोपम: equal to Dasaratha, भूमौ on this earth, अनुपम: incomparable, सूनु: हि son he was.
2::1::10::नित्यम् always, प्रशान्तात्मा one with a calm and serene mind, स: he (Rama), मृदुपूर्वम् gently, भाषते speaks, परुषम् harsh words, उच्यमान: अपि though addressed, उत्तरम् reply, न प्रतिपद्यते does not speak. 
2::1::11::आत्मवत्तया with selfrestraint, स: he (Rama), कथञ्चित् somehow, कृतेन done (by some one), एकेन single, उपकारेण benefit rendered, तुष्यति is pleased, अपकाराणाम् offences, शतमपि even a hundred, न स्मरति does not remember.
2::1::12::अस्त्रयोग्यान्तरेष्वपि even at intervals during  the practice of weapons, शीलवृद्धै: rich in virtues, ज्ञानवृद्धै: mature in wisdom, वयोवृद्धैश्च aged, सज्जनै: saintly persons, नित्यम् always, कथयन् आस्ते interacts.
2::1::13::बुद्धिमान् wise, मधुराभाषी softspoken, पूर्वभाषी first to address, प्रियंवद: speaks pleasing words, वीर्यवान् valiant, महता overwhelming, स्वेन relating to his own, वीर्येण at his strength, न च विस्मित: surprised (here, proud).
2::1::14::अनृतकथ: न च never indulged in falsehood, विद्वान् learned, वृद्धानाम् of elders, प्रतिपूजक: honours them by going forward, प्रजाभि: by his subjects, अनुरक्त: was loved, प्रजाश्चापि also his subjects, अनुरञ्जते loves.
2::1::15::सानुक्रोश: compassionate जितक्रोध: one who has conquered anger, ब्राह्मणप्रतिपूजक: worshipper of  brahmins, दीनानुकम्पी compassionate to the distressed, धर्मज्ञ: one who knows (follows) righteousness, नित्यम् always, प्रग्रहवान् selfrestrained, शुचि: pure in spirit.
2::1::16::कुलोचितमतिः having thoughts befitting his dynasty, स्वम् his own, क्षात्रं धर्मम् code of conduct relating to kshatriyas, बहुमन्यते honours, ततः from that,  कीर्त्या with glory, महत् great, स्वर्गफलम् fruits of heaven, मन्यते considers.
2::1::17::अश्रेयसि pursuits not conducive to one's welfare, रतः न not interested, विद्वान् learned, विरुद्धकथारुचिः न not interested in speaking against others, उत्तरोत्तरयुक्तौ in debates, वाचस्पति: यथा like Brihaspati, वक्ता an orator
2::1::18::अरोगः free from disease, तरुणः young, वाग्मी eloquent, वपुष्मान् healthy, देशकालवित् aware of time and place, पुरुषसारज्ञः a judge of men's worth, लोके in this world, विनिर्मितः created, एकः one, साधुः a sage.
2::1::19::श्रेष्ठै: excellent, गुणैः with qualities, युक्तः bestowed with, सः he, पार्थिवात्मजः king's son, प्रजानाम् for his subjects, गुणतः by his virtues, प्रियः favourite one, बहिश्चरः exterior, प्राणः इव  like vital life, बभूव became.
2::1::20::सम्यक् thoroughly, विद्याव्रतस्नातः had the sacred ablution marking the completion of the vow relating to the respective branches of learning, यथावत् in accordance with tradition, साङ्गवेदवित् knew Vedas along with its auxiliary sciences, भरताग्रजः elder brother of Bharata, इष्वस्त्रे in the science of archery, पितुः for father, श्रेष्ठ: best, बभूव became.
2::1::21::कल्याणाभिजनः born in a family of noble descent, साधुः saintly person, अदीनः one without meanness, सत्यवाक् one truthful in his words, ऋजुः man of rectitude, धर्मार्थदर्शिभिः by those who are conversant in dharma and artha, वृद्धैः by the aged, द्विजैः by brahmins, अभिविनीतः welldisciplined.
2::1::22::धर्मकामार्थतत्त्वज्ञः knower of true nature of dharma, artha and kama, स्मृतिमान् of (sharp) memory, प्रतिभानवान् of great genius, लौकिके समयाचारे in social practices and customs, कृतकल्पः accomplished in Kalpa (vedic rituals), विशारदः highly skilled.
2::1::23::निभृतः modest, संवृताकारः one who concealed his feelings without any outward manifestation, गुप्तमन्त्र: one who counselled in secrecy, सहायवान् having good friends, अमोघक्रोधहर्षश्च his anger or pleasure did not go vain, त्यागसंयमकालवित् knows the occasion  when to sacrifice and when to excercise restraint.
2::1::24::दृढभक्तिः was firm in his devotion, स्थिरप्रज्ञः possessed a steady intellect, असद्ग्राही न not one to accept anything ignoble, दुर्वचाः न  no bad words, निस्तन्द्रि: devoid of  idleness, अप्रमत्तः not swayed by emotions, स्वदोषपरदोषवित् knew his faults as well as of others.
2::1::25::यः who (he), शास्त्रज्ञः च wellversed in scriptures, कृतज्ञः च was grateful, पुरुषान्तरकोविद: skilled in differentiating the comparative merits of men, यथान्यायम् in accordance with  justice, प्रग्रहानुग्रहयोः in reprimanding and favouring, विचक्षणः was a skilled one.
2::1::26::सत्सङ्ग्रहप्रग्रहणे in receiving and encouraging the righteous, निग्रहस्य च in  restraining also, स्थानवित् knower of right means, आयकर्मणि in acts of raising revenue, उपायज्ञः knower of means, सन् by being so, दृष्टव्ययकर्मवित् expending money in the prescribed manner.
2::1::27::शास्त्रसमूहेषु in scriptures, व्यामिश्रकेषु च also in the mutually interconnected (and which are mutually contradictory) branches of learning, श्रैष्ठ्यम् proficiency, प्राप्तः obtained, अर्थधर्मौ in artha and dharma, सङ्गृह्य having grasped,  सुखतन्त्रः sought pleasure, अलसः न not indolent.
2::1::28::वैहारिकाणाम् meant for entertainment, शिल्पानाम् of art and craft, विज्ञाता one who understood, अर्थविभागवित् one who knows how to dispense wealth, वारणवाजिनाम् on elephants and horses, आरोहे in mounting, विनये चैव in humbling, युक्तः was experienced.
2::1::29::लोके in this world, धनुर्वेदविदाम् among those skilled in archery, श्रेष्ठः excellent,  अतिरथसम्मत: reckoned as a great wielder of warchariots by his equals, अभियाता advanced towards his enemies, प्रहर्ता च striking at them, सेनानयविशारदः expert in commanding troops.
2::1::30::क्रुद्धैः by the enraged, सुरासुरैरपि even by devatas or rakshasas, सङ्ग्रामे in the battle, अप्रधृष्यः was incapable of being repressed, अनसूयः free from envy, जितक्रोधः subdued his  anger, न दृप्तः was not proud of, मत्सरी च न was not malicious, भूतानाम् among living beings, नच अवमन्ता never slighted, कालवशानुगः च न did not bow to the pressure of time  
2::1::31::एवम् in this way, श्रेष्ठगुणैः with excellent qualities, युक्तः endowed, पार्थिवात्मजः son of the king, प्रजानाम् for his subjects, त्रिषु लोकेषु in the three worlds, सम्मतः was held in high esteem, क्षमागुणैः by the quality of forbearance, वसुधायाः by earth, बुद्ध्या by his  intelligence, बृहस्पतेः with Brihaspati's, वीर्येण by prowess, शचीपतेः consort of Sachi (Indra), तुल्यः equal.
2::1::32::तथा thus, सर्वप्रजाकान्तै: cherished by all his subjects, पितुः for his father, प्रीतिसंजननैः a source of delight, गुणैः by virtues, रामः Rama, अंशुभिः with rays, दीप्तः resplendent, सूर्यः इव like the Sun, विरुरुचे shone.
2::1::33::एवं व्रतसम्पन्नम् enriched with such avowed virtues, अप्रधृष्यपराक्रमम् a man with indomitable prowess, लोकपालोपमम् equal to guardians of the quarters, तम् him, मेदिनी the earth, नाथम् as lord, अकामयत desired.
2::1::34::परन्तपः subduer of enemies, दशरथः राजा king Dasaratha, अनुपमैः with incomparable, बहुभिः innumerable, एतैः these, गुणैः qualities, युक्तम् endowed with, सुतम् his son, दृष्ट्वा having seen, चिन्ताम् चक्रे contemplated.
2::1::35::अथ thereafter, चिरजीविनः a man of long life, वृद्धस्य of the aged, राज्ञः king, मयि me, जीवति while living, रामः Rama, राजा king, कथं स्यात् how will he become?, एषा प्रीतिः this pleasure, एवम् in this way, बभूव a (thought) flashed
2::1::36::अहम् I, अभिषिक्तम् coronate, प्रियं सुतम् dear son, कदा नाम oh when, द्रक्ष्यामि can I see, एषा this, परा great, प्रीतिः pleasure, अस्य his, हृदि in heart, संपरिवर्तते हि repeatedly surfaced. 
2::1::37::लोकस्य for this world, वृद्धिकामः desires to promote prosperity, सर्वभूतानुकम्पन: that (Rama) one who showed kindness to all living beings, वृष्टिमान् possessing rain, पर्जन्य: इव like Parjanya, the raingod, लोके in this world, मत्तः than me, प्रियतरः हि is dearer to  all people.
2::1::38::वीर्ये in prowess, यमशक्रसमः equal to Yama and Indra, मतौ in wisdom, बृहस्पति समः equal to Brihaspati, धृत्याम् in firmness, महीधरसमः equal to a mountain, मत्तः च than me also, गुणवत्तरः  a man of greater virtues.
2::1::39::कृत्स्नाम् entire dominion, इमाम् this, महीम् earth, अधितिष्ठन्तम् established, आत्मजम् son, अनेन in this, वयसा age, दृष्ट्वा having seen, अहम् I, यथा as if, स्वर्गम् heaven, अवाप्नुयाम् will attain.
2::1::40::इति in this manner, विविधैः various, अन्यपार्थिवदुर्लभैः not found in other kings, तै: तै: by respective, एतैः with these virtues, लोके in this world, अपरिमेयैः immeasurable, लोकोत्तरैः distinguished in this world, समुदितैः all converged at one place, शुभैः auspicious, शिष्टैः  praiseworthy, गुणैः virtues, युक्तम् endowed with, तम् him, समीक्ष्य having observed, महाराजः king (Dasaratha), सचिवैः सार्धम् with his ministers, निश्चित्य having decided, युवराजम् as princeregent, अमन्यत thought.
2::1::41::अथ thereafter, मेधावी sagacious (Dasaratha), दिवि in heaven, अन्तरिक्षे in the sky, भूमौ च on earth, उत्पातजम् portentous omens, घोरम् dreadful, भयम् fear, आत्मनः his, शरीरे in the body, जरां च old age also, सञ्चचक्षे perceived.
2::1::42::अथ afterwards, पूर्णचन्द्राननस्य having countenance resembling the full Moon, महात्मनः of the noble, रामस्य Rama's, आत्मनः his, शोकापनुदम् dispeller of grief, लोके सम्प्रियत्वम् he being a favourite of the people, बुबुधे realised.
2::1::43::धर्मात्मा righteous नृपः king, आत्मनश्च of his own, प्रजानां च of his subjects, श्रेयसे च for the welfare, प्रियेण च with much love, प्राप्तकालेन proper time having come, भक्त्या with longing, त्वरितवान् hastened.
2::1::44::नानानगरवास्तव्यान् residents of various cities, जानपदानपि villagers also, मेदिन्याः of this earth, प्रधानान् important persons exercising authority, पृथिवीपतीन् kings, पृथक् separately, समानिनाय summoned.
2::1::45::नराधिपः the king (Dasaratha), त्वरया in  haste, केकयराजानम् king of Kekaya country, जनकं वा or Janaka, तौ both of them, प्रियम् glad news, पश्चात् afterwards, श्रोष्यतः would hear, न आनयामास did not summon.
2::1::46::वेश्मनानाभरणैः  houses and ornaments, यथार्हम् in a befitting manner, प्रतिपूजितान् having been received respectfully, तान् all of them, राजा king (Dasaratha), अलङ्कृतः adorned, प्रजापतिः lord Brahma, प्रजाः इव like people, ददर्श beheld.
2::1::47::अथ then, परबलार्दने tormenter of the enemy forces, तस्मिन् that, नृपतौ king, उपविष्टे when he was seated, ततः thereafter, लोकसम्मताः beloved of their subjects, शेषाः remaining, राजानः kings, प्रविविशुः entered.
2::1::48::अथ then, नृपाः (those) kings, राजवितीर्णेषु given by king, विविधेषु different, आसनेषु in the seats, राजानमेव the king alone, अभिमुखाः facing, नियताः following the royal tradition, निषेदु: were seated.
2::1::49::लब्धमानैः by those who received honour, विनयान्वितैः by those endowed with modesty, उपोपविष्टैः by those seated nearby, नृपैः by the kings, पुरालयैः by those residing in towns, जानपदैः च also in villages, मानदै: by the respectful,  वृतः surrounded by, सः नृपतिः that king, अमरैः by devatas, भगवान् lord, सहस्रचक्षुरिव like the thousandeyed (Indra), बभौ shone. 
