2::23::1::While Rama was speaking thus, Lakshmana listened to him with his head down, experiencing both grief and joy.
2::23::2::Lakshmana, frowning between his eyebrows, hissed like a great serpent seized with anger in its hole. 
2::23::3:: With his frown, his face looked frightening like the face of a lion provoked.
2::23::4::Shaking his forearm like an elephant raising its trunk, moving his neck horizontally and vertically and casting a pointed and oblique look at his brother, Lakshmana said:
2::23::5::O Rama, the greatest among the brave kshatriyas you say this because of your fear that (by disobeying father's command) harm will be done to righteousness. This great haste is unwarranted for there is the least apprehension about people's verdict (in favour of exile). How do you, of all persons, speak about destiny as allpowerful in these circumstances when it is powerless?
2::23::6::Why do you extol this pitiable and powerless destiny? Why don't you doubt those two vicious persons (Dasaratha and Kaikeyi)?
2::23::7::Why don't you realise, O virtuous one that there are soft means of creating hindrances in their plan without trangressing dharma. You know dharma. Why don't you understand that their acts of deception wear the guise of dharma?
2::23::8::If both of them had not decided before, O Rama the boon granted to Kaikeyi naturally would have been fulfilled long ago. 
2::23::9:: The consecration of any one other than you, O valiant one is universally detested. I do not want to tolerate (this act). You should pardon me in this matter.
2::23::10::O noble minded one I hate this righteousness which has deluded your intellect and created this dilemma about this issue.
2::23::11:: When you are able to counter (this move), why do you want to execute the unjustifiable and contemptible words of the king who is under the spell of Kaikeyi? 
2::23::12:: I am grieved that even though this plot has been hatched by a treacherous mind, you are not taking it in the right perspective. Censurable is adherence to virtue. 
2::23::13::As both of them are steeped in passion, they never thought of your wellbeing. How will you fulfil the wishes of these enemies miscalled parents?
2::23::14:: It might be your opinion that their dictate is the decree of destiny. Even then, it does not satisfy me. It (destiny) should be ignored.
2::23::15::Those who are timid and cowardly alone depend on destiny.The valiant with of selfrespect will not accept it.
2::23::16::In the case of one capable of striking destiny with human efforts it cannot defeat his objective and bring him despondency. 
2::23::17:: Today all will witness the power of destiny and the power of man. The difference between man and destiny will be manifested today.
2::23::18::Today people will see destiny defeated by my valour just as they saw your consecration defeated (obstructed) by destiny.  
2::23::19::I will make destiny, the elephant, running wild on the strength of the rut, unmanageable (even) by the goad, turn back with my valour. 
2::23::20::All the guardians of the quarters and all the three worlds united cannot prevent the consecration of Rama today, what to speak of our father (king Dasaratha).
2::23::21::O king those who, with mutual support banished you to the forest, will themselves  dwell in the forest for fourteen years. 
2::23::22::Therefore, I shall frustrate the desire of father and of  Kaikeyi who plans the kingdom for her son by obstructing your consecration.
2::23::23:: Any one who opposes my terrible valour will come to grief. The power of destiny will not cause that much sorrow as my valour will. 
2::23::24::When after ruling the subjects for a thousand years you withdraw into the forest (for yativrata) your sons will rule them.
2::23::25::Leaving their sons to look after the subjects as their own children, the rajarsis in  ancient times used to retire into the forest as per practice.
2::23::26::O righteous one, if you apprehend chaos in the kingdom for want of wholehearted support from the (feudatory) kings then, O my valiant brother, I swear to you, I will protect your kingdom like the shore protecting the ocean. Or else, I shall never attain the afterworld of heroes.
2::23::27::The consecration may be performed with these auspicious materials. I am alone capable of facing these kings with my valour.
2::23::28::These my arms are not intended to enhance the beauty (of my body). This bow is not for decoration. The sword is not for the sake of strapping my waist. The arrows are not meant to be fixed to my quiver. All these four are meant for taming my enemies.
2::23::29:: Any one who turns my enemy will not be allowed to remain alive. Holding my sharpedged sword, lustrous as a flash of lightning, I shall  exterminate my enemy even if it were Indra, the bearer of thunder.
2::23::30:: This entire earth will become impenetrable and impassable, scattered with the trunks, thighs and heads of elephants, horses and warriors hacked off with my sword.
2::23::31::The elephants, struck by the blows of my sword, will fall on earth like mountains engulfed in flames and like clouds with lightning.
2::23::32::When I stand before men (enemies) wearing godha and fingerprotector, holding the bow ready, who amongst men will boast of his manliness?
2::23::33::Striking each of my foes with many arrows and many with one arrow, I shall aim them at the vitals of men, horses and elephants. 
2::23::34:: O Lord today you shall see the power of my glorious weapons in depriving the king (Dasaratha) of his authority and establishing your supremacy over the kingdom.   
2::23::35::These arms, O Rama which are fit for sandalwood cream, for wearing armlets, for distributing wealth and for protecting friends, will perform the worthy act of subduing those who are creating obstruction to your consecration.
2::23::36:: Tell me your enemy who should be deprived of his life, fame and friends. Command me as to how this earth shall come under your control. Now itself I shall do that. I am your servant.
2::23::37:: Wiping the tears again and again and having consoled Lakshmana for more than once, Rama, the enhancer of the glory of the Raghu dynasty said, O handsome one know, for sure, that I am firm in abiding by the words of our father. This is the true path (for me). इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्रयोविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentythird sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
