2::72::1::Not finding his father in his abode, Bharata went to see his mother in her apartment. 
2::72::2::Glorious and prosperous prince Bharata, the delight  of the  Ikshvaku race, set out from Rajagriha, took the eastern direction, and observing the course of the river Sudama crossed Hladini and Satadru rivers which were very wide and flowing westwards crested with waves.
2::72::3::On seeing her son, who was sent away, presently arriving, the delighted Kaikeyi sprang up from her golden seat. 
2::72::4::Glorious and prosperous prince Bharata, the delight  of the  Ikshvaku race, set out from Rajagriha, took the eastern direction, and observing the course of the river Sudama crossed Hladini and Satadru rivers which were very wide and flowing westwards crested with waves.
2::72::5::On entering home the righteous Bharata found it devoid of cheer and touched the auspicious feet of his mother (with reverence).
2::72::6::Bharata, ever true to his word, handsome and purehearted, reached Aparaparpata region and crossed river Satadru at Eladhana, the mountain in which river Silavaha originates. Then he traversed Salyakarsna regions in the northeast, observing the course of the Silavaha and went beyond the great mountains in the direction of the forest called Chaitraratha.
2::72::7:: Kaikeyi, gave her illustrious son Bharata a hug, kissed him on his forehead, made him rest on her lap and began her query.
2::72::8::How many nights have you spent (on the way) since you left your noble grandfather's residence? Hasn't the hurried journey (over such a long distance) on the chariot left you exhausted?
2::72::9:: Arriving at the confluence of Saraswati and Ganga and traversing the north of  Veeramatsya region, he entered the Bharunda forest.
2::72::10::My son are your revered grandfather and your maternal uncle Yudhajit doing well? Did you have a pleasant time during the sojourn? You should tell me all this.
2::72::11:: He crossed the swiftflowing river known as Kulinga surrounded by hills and pleasing to the mind. Thereafter on crossing Yamuna he made his army rest on the otherside.
2::72::12::Thus asked lovingly by his mother Kaikeyi, the lotuseyed Bharata, the king's delight  narrated everything to her.  
2::72::13::The weary horses rested and cooled their bodies. And they bathed and drank. They set out again refreshed taking with them a store of water.  
2::72::14::This is the seventh night since I left my noble grandsire's residence. My mother's father, king of Kekaya and my maternal uncle Yudhajit are doing well.
2::72::15::Then with the blessed prince (Bharata) on an excellent chariot, it (the army) moved through the vast and uninhabited forest like the god of wind passing through the sky. 
2::72::16:: The (horses carrying) the wealth including the gems which the king (of Kekaya), the subduer of enemies had bestowed on me were exhausted on the way. Therefore I have come in advance.
2::72::17::Bharata, the descendant of Raghu, knowing that the mighty river Bhagirathi was difficult to cross at a place known as Anshudhana, quickly reached the famous city of Pragvata.
2::72::18:: Urged upon by the messengers carrying out the orders of the king, I have come. You, O mother, should answer the questions. I wish to ask you. 
2::72::19::With Ganga at Pragvata city and river Kutikoshtika crossed along with his army, he  reached Dharmavardhana village.  
2::72::20:: Your goldbedecked couch, worthy of resting lies empty. None of the attendants of the Ikshvakus look cheerful.
2::72::21:: Having traversed the southern end of Torana, the son of Dasaratha (Bharata) reached  the beautiful Varutha village via Jambuprastha.
2::72::22:: I had come here with the hope to see king Dasaratha who spends most of his time in my mother's residence. But today I do not see him . 
2::72::23::He (Bharata) halted in that charming forest for a while, proceeded eastwards till he reached a place known as Ujjihana garden abounding in spriyaka trees.
2::72::24::I would like to pay obeisance at my father's feet. Will you answer my question, O mother, and tell me regarding his whereabouts? Or perchance could he be at the residence of my eldest mother Kausalya?
2::72::25:: After reaching the groves of sala and priyaka trees, Bharata harnessed the swiftrunning horses to the chariot and ordered his forces to proceed fast.     
2::72::26::In spite of knowing everything, Kaikeyi actuated by greed for the kingdom, broke the unpleasant and dreadful news as if it were pleasing to Bharata, who was ignorant of what had transpired.
2::72::27:: That tiger among men, Bharata halted at a place known as Sarvatirtha and crossed the Uttanika and various other rivers with the help of hillborn horses. He crossed the Kutika river on an elephant the river Kapivati at a place known as Lauhitya.
2::72::28::Your highsouled, brilliant father ever engaged in performing sacrifices and a refuge for the virtuous people, went the inevitable way every living being must follow (attained heaven).
2::72::29:: That tiger among men, Bharata halted at a place known as Sarvatirtha and crossed the Uttanika and various other rivers with the help of hillborn horses. He crossed the Kutika river on an elephant the river Kapivati at a place known as Lauhitya.
2::72::30:: On hearing these words, he (Bharata), born of a righteous race and endowed with purity of character was shattered by the immense grief of his father's demise and dropped down instantaneously on the floor.
2::72::31::Bharata crossed the rivers Sthanumati at Ekasala and Gomati at Vinata villages. Thereafter as his horses were extremely tired he rested for a while in the sala forest in  Kalinganagara before he speedily set out (again).
2::72::32::The mightyarmed, valiant Bharata, uttering pitiable words, evoking compassion. Alas, I am finished fell down at once throwing up his arms.
2::72::33:: He passed quickly through the forest at night and at sunrise beheld the city of Ayodhya built by king Manu.  
2::72::34::Overwhelmed with grief, radiant Bharata reeling with delusion due to sorrow, lamented over the death of his father.
2::72::35::Having spent seven nights on his way, that tiger among men (Bharata) saw Ayodhaya before him. He said to the charioteer:
2::72::36::This couch of my father once used to shine like the spotless night sky irradiated by the autumnal Moon. 
2::72::37:: O charioteer I am able to see Ayodhya of great renown from a  distance  but not so clearly that whiteclaycity of Ayodhya, with its sacred gardens ruled by several rajarsis, inhabited by numerous wealthy people, by virtuous brahmins and priests who perform sacrifices and who are wellversed in the Vedas. 
2::72::38:: But today this couch without my sagacious father no longer shines like the sky without the Moon or like the sea evaporated.
2::72::39::Bharata, the foremost among the victorious, clearing his tearchoked throat and covering his auspicious countenance with raiment, wept in profound distress with tears overflowing.
2::72::40::I do not hear now, in Ayodhya the tumultous noise of men and women I used to hear earlier all over.   
2::72::41:: Anguished and griefstricken, he who resembled the gods, fell down on the ground like a trunk of the sala tree in the forest severed by an axe. Seeing her son who was like a mighty elephant or like the Sun or the Moon, Kaikeyi lifted him up from the ground and spoke these words:
2::72::42::I do not see people who with passion used to stroll in the parks early in the morning. I see no cheerfulness in any one.
2::72::43:: Anguished and griefstricken, he who resembled the gods, fell down on the ground like a trunk of the sala tree in the forest severed by an axe. Seeing her son who was like a mighty elephant or like the Sun or the Moon, Kaikeyi lifted him up from the ground and spoke these words:
2::72::44::O charioteer, people full of passion have abandoned the gardens. To me, the city looks like a forest as if weeping.
2::72::45:: O illustrious prince arise, arise. Why are you lying down on the floor? Learned people like you, who are worthy of honour in the assembly ought not to grieve like this.
2::72::46::Important people mounted on elephants or horses are not seen going out of the city or coming in.
2::72::47::O highly intelligent one, by your wisdom, virtuous conduct and scriptural knowledge you are entitled to dispense charity and perform sacrifices. You will always shine incessantly like light of the Sun.
2::72::48::Earlier the gardens used to reverberate with passionate songs of birds--places  appropriate for lovers seeking pleasures.
2::72::49:: Bharata engulfed in profuse sorrow wept for a long time rolling on the ground and then said these words in reply to his mother:
2::72::50::Now the trees appear cheerless, the paths are full of dry leaves fallen all over. It appears as if the trees are crying.
2::72::51::Thinking that the king is about to consecrate Rama or perform some sacrifice, I undertook the journey in great delight. 
2::72::52::I do not hear in the red tincture of the rising Sun the melodious voices of the freely moving animals and birds.
2::72::53::Now everything has turned out to be different. My mind is shattered.I no longer behold my father who is ever intent on my welfare and happiness. 
2::72::54::Why is it that the incomparable fragrance of sandal and incense that used to fill the nostrils, not blowing now in the prosperous city of Ayodhya?
2::72::55::O mother what ailment caused the king's death before I could return? How fortunate are Rama and others by whom the last rites of my father were performed 
2::72::56::Why is it that the sounds of musical instruments like mrudangas and veenas are not heard now? Why is the city filled with melancholy?
2::72::57::Surely the illustrious maharaja is not aware of my arrival. Otherwise he would have quickly bent my head and kissed me on my forehead.
2::72::58::Since I see many passing, inauspicious, sinful, ugly sights, my mind shrinks.
2::72::59::Where is that hand of my father of unwearied actions, the hand that would wipe away the dust from my person with a pleasant touch?
2::72::60::I do not see anywhere, O charioteer the wellbeing, of my kinsmen. Hence I feel deluded and my heart is filled with grief.
2::72::61:: Announce at once my arrival to the wise Rama, the man of unwearied actions, my brother, father and friend whose slave I am.
2::72::62::Dejected and depressed at heart, with no control over his senses and his mind full of apprehension, Bharata swiftly entered the city of Ayodhya ruled by the  Ikshvakus. 
2::72::63:: To one who knows the ways of righteouness the elder brother is (like) the father. Indeed, he (Rama) is my refuge and I shall hold his feet now.
2::72::64:: He entered the city through the gate known as Vaijayanta with his horses exhausted. The doorkeepers stood up and amidst cries of victory followed him in. 
2::72::65::What did my father, the noble king, conversant with righteous conduct, true, to his vows, one who always conducted himself in a righteous manner, whose truth was his prowess (at the time of his death)?
2::72::66::Bewildered, that descendant of Raghu (Bharata), reciprocated the greetings of the gatekeepers and then addressed the exhausted charioteer, Ashwapati:
2::72::67::I want to hear the exact words of my father's last message to me. Thus questioned (by Bharata), Kaikeyi related the exact facts: 
2::72::68::O irreproachable one, why was I brought here in haste without any reason? My mind apprehends something inauspicious. I feel indisposed.  
2::72::69:: O charioteer I now see the very for ebodings I had heard in the past in connection with the death of  kings.
2::72::70:: The magnanimous king, the foremost of those who attained the excellent state after, death, went to the other world, lamenting 'O Rama, O Sita, O Lakshamana'.
2::72::71::Your father, caught by the noose of death, like a great elephant bound by cords, uttered these last words:
2::72::72::I see the unswept homes of householders standing dirty with doors not closed. There is no beauty anywhere. No one offers oblations (at the time of worship). There is no   fragrance of burning incense. The families have no food to eat. The people look cheerless. I see inauspiciousness everywhere.
2::72::73::'Those men who will see Rama returning home along with Sita and mightyarmed Lakshmana, will have their desires fulfilled.'
2::72::74::I see the unswept homes of householders standing dirty with doors not closed. There is no beauty anywhere. No one offers oblations (at the time of worship). There is no   fragrance of burning incense. The families have no food to eat. The people look cheerless. I see inauspiciousness everywhere.
2::72::75::Bharata was more distraught on hearing the words that conveyed the second unpleasant tidings. With downcast countenance, he again enquired of his mother thus:
2::72::76::I see the unswept homes of householders standing dirty with doors not closed. There is no beauty anywhere. No one offers oblations (at the time of worship). There is no   fragrance of burning incense. The families have no food to eat. The people look cheerless. I see inauspiciousness everywhere.
2::72::77:: Where has righteous Rama who enhances the delight of Kausalya along with his  brother Lakshmana and Sita gone now?
2::72::78:: The temples stand devoid of the beauty of floral offerings. The floors of front yards are left unswept and unsmeared. They look deserted, devoid of brightness of the past.
2::72::79:: Thus questioned, his mother started relating the exact events, presuming them to be pleasant tidings (for Bharata).
2::72::80::The offerings to deities have been dispensed with. There are no groups of people   performing the usual holy sacrifices. The markets where garlands were sold now stand without them.
2::72::81::O my son, prince Rama attired in garments of bark along with Sita and followed by Lakshmana left for the great Dandaka forest.    
2::72::82:: Even traders seem restrained by the loss of business. They are not seen as before concentrating on their trade.
2::72::83::Conscious of the glory of his race, Bharata continued to enquire if there was any unrighteous conduct on the part of his brother.
2::72::84::I see groups of birds frequenting the temples. The sanctuaries appear dispirited. The people in the city, both men and women look dull, emaciated, pitiable with throats choked. Their eyes are filled with tears and minds absorbed in distressing thoughts.
2::72::85:: I hope Rama did not seize the wealth of any brahmin nor did any harm to an innocent person, whether rich or poor. 
2::72::86::I see groups of birds frequenting the temples. The sanctuaries appear dispirited. The people in the city, both men and women look dull, emaciated, pitiable with throats choked. Their eyes are filled with tears and minds absorbed in distressing thoughts.
2::72::87:: I hope he did not covet another man's wife. Like a sinner who had slain a child in embryo why has he been banished to Dandaka forest?  
2::72::88:: With these words said to the charioteer, Bharata, having seen such ominous sights in Ayodhya,  proceeded to the king's palace with a depressed heart.
2::72::89::Then the capricious mother, with the same feminine disposition which she had displayed earlier, started giving a faithful account of all her deeds.  
2::72::90:: As he (Bharata) beheld the city of Ayodhya that once had the lustre of the city of Indra, now with its crossroads, houses and highways all deserted, the fittings (nuts and bolts) on the doors red with dust,  he was overwhelmed with grief.
2::72::91::On hearing the words of great Bharata, that foolish woman Kaikeyi thinking herself to be wise, cheerfully said:
2::72::92::Having witnessed many unpleasant things that had never happened before, the  magnanimous Bharata who was looking cheerless and dejected entered his father's palace with his head bent down. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकसप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventyfirst sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
2::72::93:: Rama did not rob any brahmin of even a little wealth nor did he harm any innocent man, whether rich or poor. He never casts his eyes on another's wife.
2::72::94:: My son, I on hearing of Rama's consecration asked your father to confer the kingdom on you and banish Rama.
2::72::95:: Your father, faithful to his word, banished Rama along with Lakshmana and Sita.  
2::72::96:: The renowned ruler of the earth (king Dasaratha), unable to behold (the sorry state of) his beloved son and stricken by filial grief, merged into the five elements (died).
2::72::97::O knower of dharma, assume kingship now. It is only for your sake that all this has been done by me.
2::72::98:: My son, give up sorrow and agony and take recourse to courage. This city as well as the kingdom, free from all obstacles, is under your control.
2::72::99::Therefore, my son, under the guidance of Vasistha and other noble brahmins, wellversed in rituals, quickly perform the funeral obsequies in accordance with tradition and without getting depressed in spirit, get yourself coronated as lord of this earth.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्विसप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventysecond sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
