2::87::1::Extremely unhappy over what he heard from Guha, Bharata was immersed in thought then and there.
2::87::2::The delicate, youthful, highly energetic and mightyarmed Bharata of graceful appearance, with shoulders like that of a lion and wideeyed like lotus petals, recovered for a moment and with a mind deeply distressed fell down at once like an elephant smitten by a goad.
2::87::3::Seeing Bharata in that state, Satrughna who was standing close by, smitten with grief clasped him, cried loudly and fell senseless.
2::87::4::Then Bharata's mothers, who were emaciated due to fasting and afflicted by the calamity of the death of their husband were desolate, rushed towards him.
2::87::5::Sobbing, they gathered around Bharata who had fallen on the ground, while Kausalya approached him in a depressed state and took him into her arms.
2::87::6::Desolate Kausalya, in deep distress, clasped Bharata out of filial love as if he were her own child, wept and enquired of him:
2::87::7::O son I hope you are not affected by illness. Now the existence of this royal house devolves on you.
2::87::8::O my son, with Rama gone to the forest along with your brother Lakshmana and with king Dasaratha departed from this world, I continue to live seeing you. From now on you alone are our sole protector.
2::87::9::O my son, I hope you have not heard any unpleasant news about Lakshmana or about my only son Rama who has gone to the forest along with his wife.
2::87::10::Highly renowned Bharata, composing himself for a moment and still weeping, reassured Kauslaya, and then said this to Guha:
2::87::11:: O Guha where did my brother Rama, Sita and Lakshmana spend that night? What did they eat? On what couch did they sleep? Tell me all that.  
2::87::12::Thereupon delighted Guha, overlord of the nishadas, told Bharata all that he had provided to Rama, his beloved friend and guest:
2::87::13::I offered Rama rice including a variety of eatables like fruits in great quantity for his food.
2::87::14::Rama whose prowess is his truth, acknowledged all that but remembering the duty enjoined on a kshatriya did not accept them.
2::87::15::O king that great Rama entreated us in a friendly manner by saying 'O friend we should always give to others but should never accept anything from others'.
2::87::16::Illustrious Rama along with Sita only drank the water brought by Lakshamana and  undertook fasting.
2::87::17::Thereafter Lakshmana also drank the remainder of water. Then all the three observing silence intently performed the evening worship.
2::87::18::Therafter, the son of Sumitra (Lakshmana) himself fetched darbha grass and quickly prepared an auspicious and comfortable bed for Rama. 
2::87::19::Rama lay down upon the bed along with Sita. Thereafter Lakshmana, having washed their feet, moved to a distant place.
2::87::20::Here at the foot of the ingudi tree and upon that bed of grass both Rama and Sita rested that night.
2::87::21::Lakshmana, the scorcher of enemies, wearing protective covering for his palms and fingers (made of gohaskin), strapping on his back two quivers filled with arrows, holding a great bow, strung ready, stood sentinel throughout the night guarding the surrounding.
2::87::22::Then, holding the best of arrows and bow along with my indefatigable kinsmen similarly armed with bows, I stood by the side of Lakshmana guarding Rama who is comparable to Indra.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्ताशीतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eightyseventh sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
