2::111::1::राजपुरोहितः  royal priest, वसिष्टस्तु Vasistha on his part, तदा then, रामम् to Rama, उक्त्वा  spoke further, पुनरेव again, धर्मसंयुक्तम् on righteousness, अपरं वचः some otherword, अब्रवीत् said. 
2::111::2::काकुत्स्थ O Kakutstha, राघव Rama, जातस्य of one who is born, पुरुषस्य for a person, आचार्यश्चैव the preceptor, पिता the father, माता च the mother, त्रयः three, गुरवः भवन्ति   become gurus.
2::111::3::पुरुषर्षभ O best of men, एवं पुरुषम् in such a way a man, पिता father, जनयति हि begets, आचार्यः teacher, प्रज्ञाम् wisdom, ददाति gives, तस्मात् therefore, सः that (teacher), गुरुः     become guru, उच्यते is called. 
2::111::4::सः अहम् that I, ते पितुः of your father, तव चैव and also your, आचार्यः preceptor, परन्तप O destroyer of foes, त्वम् you, मम my, वचनम् order, कुर्वन् carrying out, सताम् of virtuous men's, गतिम् path, नातिवर्तेः you will not transgress. 
2::111::5::तात my child, इमाः these, परिषदः assembly of men, श्रेणयश्च guilds of merchants and others, तथा also, द्विजाः the twiceborn, ते हि are yours, एषु towards them, धर्मम् duty, चरन्  while practising, सताम् of  the virtuous, गतिम् path, नातिवर्तेः you will never swerve.
2::111::6::वृद्धायाः of an aged woman, धर्मशीलायाः of a righteousminded woman, मातुः of the mother, अवर्तितुम् not to attend her, नार्हसि is not proper, अस्याः her, वचनम् words, कुर्वन् obeying, सताम् of the virtuous, गतिम् path, नातिवर्तेः you will not deviate. 
2::111::7::सत्यधर्मपराक्रम one whose strength comes from truth and righteousness, राघव Rama, त्वम् you, याचमानस्य of the supplicant, भरतस्य Bharata's, वचः words, कुर्वन् by following, आत्मानम् call of your soul, नातिवर्तेः will not ignore. 
2::111::8::पुरुषर्षभः the best of men, राघवः Rama, गुरुणा by the preceptor, स्वयम् personally, एवम् in that way, मधुरम् with sweet words, उक्तस्सन् by having been addressed, समासीनम् who was sitting beside, वसिष्ठम्  to Vasistha, प्रत्युवाच replied.   
2::111::9::मातापितरौ parents, तनये in relation to son, सदा always, यत् what, वृत्तम् course of action, कुरुतः perform, यथाशक्तिप्रदानेन by conferring benefits according to their resources, स्वापनोच्छादनेन च by lulling him to sleep, clothing him, नित्यं च always, प्रियवादेन with affectionate words, तथा similarly, संवर्धनेन च bringing him up, मात्रा by mother, पित्रा च and by father, यत् what, कृतम् was done, तत्तु all that, न सुप्रतिकरम् cannot easily be repaid.
2::111::10::मातापितरौ parents, तनये in relation to son, सदा always, यत् what, वृत्तम् course of action, कुरुतः perform, यथाशक्तिप्रदानेन by conferring benefits according to their resources, स्वापनोच्छादनेन च by lulling him to sleep, clothing him, नित्यं च always, प्रियवादेन with affectionate words, तथा similarly, संवर्धनेन च bringing him up, मात्रा by mother, पित्रा च and by father, यत् what, कृतम् was done, तत्तु all that, न सुप्रतिकरम् cannot easily be repaid.
2::111::11::मम my, पिता father, सः that, राजा दशरथः king Dasaratha, जनयिता हि he begot me, मया by me, तस्य to him, यत् whatever, आज्ञातं was promised, तत् that one, मिथ्या false, न भविष्यति shall not become. 
2::111::12::परमोदारः a man of great generosity, भरतः Bharata, रामेण by Rama, एवम् in this way, उक्तः  having been addressed, परमदुर्मनाः with extremely distressed mind, प्रत्यनन्तरं who was  nearby, सूतम् to the charioteer, उवाच said.
2::111::13::सारथे O charioteer, मे to me, इह here, स्थण्डिले on the bare ground, शीघ्रम् quickly, कुशान् kusa grass, आस्तर spread, यावत् till such time, मे to me, न प्रसीदति does not show his grace, आर्यम् esteemed brother Rama, प्रत्युपवेक्ष्यामि shall lie down here waiting for him.
2::111::14::धनहीन: poor, द्विजः यथा like a brahmin, अनाहारः starve, निरालोकः  without seeing the light (of the day), शालायाः of the hut, पुरस्तात् in front of, यावत् till such time, न प्रतियास्यति does not return, शेष्ये I shall lie down. 
2::111::15::दुर्मनाः of troubled mind, स तु that Bharata, रामम् at Rama, अवेक्षन्तम् glancing at, सुमन्त्रम् Sumantra, प्रेक्ष्य seeing, स्वयमेव himself, कुशोत्तरम् of kusa grass, उपस्थाप्य having brought, भूमौ on the ground, आस्तरत् spread. 
2::111::16::महातेजाः highly powerful, राजर्षिसत्तमः the foremost of royal sages, रामः Rama, तम् to him (Bharata), उवाच said, तातः O dear one, भरत Bharata, किं कुर्वाणम् what have I done, माम्  before me, प्रत्युपवेक्ष्यसि preventing me by lying down?
2::111::17::ब्राह्मणः brahmin, एकपार्श्वेन (lying down) on one side, नरान् to men, इह in this world, रोद्धुम् to prevent, अर्हति हि is competent, मूर्धाभिषिक्तानां तु for one who is anointed king, प्रत्युपवेशने  to sit in protest, विधिः न there is no tradition.  
2::111::18::नरशार्दूल O best of men, राघव Bharata, एतत् all this, दारुणम् formidable, व्रतम् resolve, हित्वा give up, उत्तिष्ठ arise, इतः from here, क्षिप्रम् quickly, पुरवर्याम् to the best of cities, अयोध्याम् Ayodhya, याहि you may return. 
2::111::19::भरतः Bharata, आसीनस्त्वेव while remaining seated, पौरजानपदम् men inhabiting towns and villages, जनम् men, सर्वतः on all sides, प्रेक्ष्य looking, आर्यम् esteemed brother, किम् why, नानुशासथ don't you all persuade, उवाच said. 
2::111::20::पौरजानपदाः inhabiting in towns and villages, ते जनाः those people, महात्मानम्  magnanimous, तम् to Bharata, ऊचुः uttered, काकुत्स्थम् about Kakustha (Rama), अभिजानीयः we know very well, राघवः Rama, सम्यक् properly, वदति  says.
2::111::21::एषः this, महाभागः highly distinguished Rama, पितुः father's, वचसि word, तिष्ठति हि is fixed, अत एव that is why, अञ्जसा quickly, व्यावर्तयितुम् to make him return, शक्ताः capable, न स्मः not. 
2::111::22::रामः Rama, तेषाम् their, वचनम् words, आज्ञाय having understood, वचनम् words, अब्रवीत् said, धर्मचक्षुषाम् through righteous vision, सुहृदाम् friends, एवम् in this way, वचनम् words, निबोध  understand.
2::111::23::महाबाहो O mightyarmed one, राघव Bharata, एतत् all this, उभयं चैव both, श्रुत्वा having heard, सम्यक् carefully, सम्पश्य having thought over, त्वम् you, उत्तिष्ठ arise, मां च me, तथा as also, उदकम् water, स्पृश touch. 
2::111::24::अथ then, भरतः Bharata, उत्थाय having stood up, जलम् water, स्पृष्ट्वा having touched, वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवीत् said, परिषदः O men of the assembly, मन्त्रिणः O counsellors, तथा also, श्रेणयः O guildsmen, मे me, श्रुण्वन्तु listen. 
2::111::25::पितरम् my father, राज्यम् kingdom, न याचे did not ask, मातरम् mother, नानुशासामि did not urge, परमधर्मज्ञम् supremely knowleldgeable in ways of righteousness, आर्यम् esteemed, राघवम् Rama, नानुजानामि I did not consent. 
2::111::26::अवश्यम् absolutely, वस्तव्यं यदि if it is essential to live in the forest, पितुः father's, वचः words, कर्तव्यं च must be done, अहमेव I myself, चतुर्दश समाः fourteen years, वने in the forest, निवत्स्यामि I will reside.
2::111::27::धर्मात्मा righteous, रामः Rama, तस्य his, भ्रातुः brother's, तथ्येन genuine, वाक्येन with words, विस्मितः was astonished, पौरजानपदम् inhabiting the towns and villages, जनम् people, सम्प्रेक्ष seeing, उवाच said.  
2::111::28::मम my, जीवता while living, पित्रा by father, यत् what, विक्रीतम् was sold, आहितम् pledged, क्रीतम् bought, तत् that, लोपयितुं to annul, मया वा by me or, भरतेन वा or Bharata, न शक्यम् not possible.
2::111::29::मया by me, वनवासे in the matter of living in the forest, जुगुप्सितः reprehensible, उपधिः placing a substitute, न कार्यः shall not be done, कैकेय्या by Kaikeyi, युक्तम् rightly, उक्तम् spoken, मे पित्रा by my father, सुकृतम् good deed, कृतम् has been done.
2::111::30::भरतम् Bharata, क्षान्तम् a man of forbearance, गुरुसत्कारकारिणम् honours elders, जानामि I know, सत्यसन्धे true to his word, महात्मनि great, अत्र for him, सर्वमेव everything, कल्याणम् will be auspicious. 
2::111::31::वनात् from the forest, पुनः again, प्रत्यागतः when returned, धर्मशीलेन of virtuous conduct, अनेन भ्रात्रा सह along with this brother, पृथिव्याः of the earth, उत्तमः supreme, पतिः lord, भविष्यामि I shall become. 
2::111::32::राजा the king (Dasaratha), कैकेय्या by Kaikeyi, वृतो हि has been solicited, मया by me, तद्वचनं those words, कृतम् are followed, अनेन for that reason, महीपतिम् the lord of the earth, तं पितरम् that father, अनृतात् from falsehood, मोचय you may release. 
