2::12::1::After hearing the dreadful words of Kaikeyi, the maharaja (Dasaratha), engulfed in grief, was extremely distressed for a moment.
2::12::2:: ' Is this a dream? Or a hallucination of the mind? Or some foreboding evil I am going to experience or a malady of my mind'? (wondered Dasaratha)
2::12::3::The King absorbed in such thoughts did not get solace. He was startled  and distressed like a deer beholding a tigress. He had long lost the senses struck by the (ruthless) words of Kaikeyi. He sank down upon the bare floor heaving deep sighs like  a venomous serpent lying confined in a circle. 'What a pity' said the king with indignation and with his senses overwhelmed  by sorrow  fell into a stupor again.
2::12::4:: Regaining his consciousness after a long time, the king in deep grief and with eyes as though burning in anger looked at  Kaikeyi  and said: 
2::12::5::O woman of cruel and sinful nature, you are bent on destroying this family. What harm has been done to you  by Rama or by me?
2::12::6::Then Rama was conducting himself in relation to you as his own mother, for what purpose are you seeking injustice to such a person?
2::12::7:: In my ignorance I brought home for my selfdestruction a king's daughter who was like a venomous female serpent.
2::12::8::When all living beings of this world are extoling the virtues of Rama, for what crime should I abandon my beloved son? 
2::12::9::I shall give up Kausalya or Sumitra or all my wealth or even my own life but I cannot leave Rama who is devoted to his father.  
2::12::10:: When I see my firstborn , I experience supreme delight. But if I do not see him, my life loses its meaning.
2::12::11::This world can exist without the Sun or crops (can be grown) without water but without Rama, life would not exist in my body. 
2::12::12:: O lady of evil intentions, enough of this. Give up your resolve. Here I touch your feet with my head. Be pleased with me. 
2::12::13::O sinful one why have you got this most dreadful thought? Do you want to know  my likes or dislikes about Bharata? Let them be so.But speaking of Rama earlier, you used to say, 'Rama is my eldest son. He is noble and foremost in discharging his  duties.' Such sweet words could not have been said only to please me. 
2::12::14::Further you are tormented with sorrow under the influence of others' insinuations. You are causing me great pain by entering the empty chamber of wrath.
2::12::15::O queen, till now you had a moral sense. With your mind debased (now), a very great immorality has infected the  Ikshvaku race.
2::12::16::O largeeyed lady, you have never done anything improper or unpalatable towards me in the past. Therefore I do not  believe your words. 
2::12::17::O childish one, you used to tell me several times that Rama is as dear to you as the highsouled Bharata. 
2::12::18:: O lady how do you wish this righteous and illustrious Rama to dwell in the forest for fourteen years?
2::12::19::Why do you want Rama who is so tender and a firm follower of dharma to dwell in the highly dreadful forest?
2::12::20:: O woman with attractive eyes, why do you want Rama who is so charming and serving you to be exiled to a distant place? 
2::12::21::Rama is doing greater service to you than Bharata. Therefore, I do not find any reason for you to have a special love for Bharata.
2::12::22::There are many thousands of women and attendants (in the inner apartment), but who will do greater service and honour you more than Rama, the best among men in the execution of your orders.
2::12::23::The best among men, Rama has won the trust of the inhabitants of the country by securing their affection with a pure heart and by doing acts dear to them. Therefore, neither a word of blame nor reproach applies to this scion of the Raghu dynasty (Rama).
2::12::24::Rama is a hero who wins over the people by his truthfulness, the poor by charity, the preceptors by his service and the enemies in the battle by the power of  his bow.
2::12::25:: Truth, munificence, asceticism, renunciation, purity, uprightness, learning and service to his superiors all those (virtues) are firmly planted in this descendant of the Raghus. 
2::12::26:: How do you, O Devi, wish to harm Rama who is endowed with uprightness, who resembles the gods and in lustre to great ascetics? 
2::12::27::How can I, for your sake, speak harsh to my beloved Rama who uses pleasing words to the people of the world, and never an unpleasant word which I can recall? 
2::12::28:: Where is the refuge for me without him in whom dwell forgiveness, forbearance, renunciation, truthfulness, righteousness, gratefulness and also nonviolence towards all living beings? 
2::12::29::O Kaikeyi, you should show mercy to this wretched, old man on the verge of death, wailing pitifully.
2::12::30:: I shall give you all that can be secured on this earth bounded by the ocean. Show no anger. 
2::12::31::O Kaikeyi I bow to you with folded palms. I touch your feet, too. Be the saviour of Rama. Let no sin taint me here (in this life).
2::12::32:: Then the fierce Kaikeyi used fiercer words in reply to the king who was tormented with grief and filled with tears, senses switched off, head reeling, overwhelmed with pain, beseeching again and again to ferry him across the ocean of sorrow as quickly as possible: 
2::12::33::O valiant king, if you repent like this after having given two boons, how will you talk about your righteousness on this earth?
2::12::34:: O knower of righteousness when innumerable rajarshis assemble and ask you on this what answer will you give?
2::12::35:: Will you say, 'To such a Kaikeyi by whose mercy I am alive and by whom I was protected, I have broken the promise given'?
2::12::36:: O king, right now having given two boons, you are speaking otherwise. You are bringing blemish to kings (of the Ikshwaku race)
2::12::37::(King) Saibya gave his own flesh to the hawk in the conflict between the hawk and the pigeon. (King) Alarka gave his eyes (to a blind man) and attained the highest state.    
2::12::38:: Having made the vow (to the gods), the ocean does not advance beyond the shore. Recollect the history of the earlier kings and do not make the vow false.
2::12::39::O wickedminded one, deserting righteousness and installing Rama in the kingdom, you want to enjoy life with Kausalya everafter?  
2::12::40::Whether righteous or unrighteous, true or false, there is no deviation from what you have promised to me. 
2::12::41::If Rama is coronated I will die while as you are watching right in your presence today itself by drinking excessive poison.
2::12::42:: If I were to see Rama's mother receiving homage from everybody even for a day, I shall prefer my death.
2::12::43:: O king, I swear on Bharata and on my own life that nothing less than Rama's banishment will satisfy me. 
2::12::44::Kaikeyi, having spoken to this extent remained silent. She heeded not the lament of the king. 
2::12::45:: Having heard of the highly unfair demands by Kaikeyi for Rama's exile to the forest and Bharata's prosperity (enthronement), the king was dumbstruck for a while with his senses agitated. He did not speak to Kaikeyi.
2::12::46::The unhappy king intently fixed his gaze at his beloved queen speaking unpleasant words charged with grief and anguish, unpleasant to the heart like the dreadful thunderbolt. 
2::12::47:: Reflecting on the determination of the queen and her dreadful vow, the king sighed and cried, 'O Rama' and then fell down like a tree severed. 
2::12::48::The lord of the earth (Dasaratha) became like a man with the mind deranged, like a sick man behaving to the contrary, like a serpent with its energy drained (through mantra).
2::12::49:: The king addressed Kaikeyi in humble words saying, Why did you exhibit this unfortunate act apparently beneficial to you? You are not ashamed of saying this like one whose faculties are possessed by an evil spirit.
2::12::50::I never knew earlier when you were young that you possessed such perverse behaviour. But now I perceive the reverse (of what I knew).
2::12::51::You are asking for a boon that Bharata should be enthroned in the kingdom while Rama should live in the forest. From where did you get this apprehension?
2::12::52:: If you wish to do good to your husband, to the world and also to Bharata, refrain from this illusory thought.
2::12::53::O cruel one, O woman of sinful resolve, O vile (creature), O woman of evil deeds, what  wrong or sin do you really see in Rama or in me.
2::12::54::Depriving Rama, Bharata in no way will occupy the kingdom because in the matter of righteousness I think he is superior even to Rama.
2::12::55::While instructing Rama to go to the forest, how can I look at his face, pale like the eclipsed moon? 
2::12::56:: I have taken this decision in consultation with friends to install Rama. How can I see such a decision being reversed like a retreating army defeated by enemies? Kings from different quarters have already arrived and they will say, How did this ignorant descendant of the Ikshakus (Dasaratha) rule this kingdom for such a long time?
2::12::57::When several virtuous and learned elders ask me about Rama, what shall I tell them?
2::12::58:: If I tell the truth 'Tortured by Kaikeyi, I have sent Rama to the forest', none will believe it  and they will consider it untruth.
2::12::59::If Rama takes refuge in the forest, what will Kausalya say to me? Having committed such an unpleasant act, what reply can I give her?
2::12::60:: Sweetspoken Kausalya who always cherishes my welfare. who has given me my beloved son, who has served me like an attendant, a friend, a wife, a sister and a mother deserved courteous treatment from me, but  because of you, she never received due attention from me. 
2::12::61::I have done many favours to you. Like a sick person afflicted by eating rice mixed with unwholesome curry, those acts of kindness are burning me now.
2::12::62:: In seeing the insult meted out to Rama and his journey to the forest, how will frightened  Sumitra  have confidence in me? 
2::12::63:: Alas Sita will listen in a pitiable state the two unpleasant events namely my death and  Rama's exile to the foest.
2::12::64:: What a pity Vaidehi, lamenting like a Kinnari forsaken by a Kinnara on the Himalayan slopes, will cause death to me.
2::12::65::With Rama living in the wilderness and Sita crying, I do not hope to survive for long, indeed. 
2::12::66:: O Devi you will certainly rule the kingdom as a widow along with your son. (But) I do not wish to live after Rama is exiled.
2::12::67:: Like people regarding wine mixed with poison as fine before drinking it, I had a firm belief that you were a chaste woman, but while you who look extremely beautiful you are actually not so.
2::12::68::You used to console me with so many words pleasing but untrue and you killed me like a hunter getting the deer trapped and slaughtered through the melody of music.
2::12::69::Respectable people on the highway will certainly say 'He sold away his son' and censure me as a mean person like a brahmin consuming liquor.   
2::12::70:: What suffering What a calamity that I am made to put up with your words. I am subject to this suffering may be as expiation for the sin formerly committed.
2::12::71::O wretch I protected you in my folly for a long time through ignorance, like a rope preserved which turned out to be a noose to hang me with.
2::12::72::While sporting with you, I did not realize you were death incarnate. Like a child handling a black cobra I caressed you. 
2::12::73:: Wicked I am, I have made that magnanimous Rama fatherless. This world of living beings is certainly entitled to condemn me. 
2::12::74::(They will say), 'Alas how utterly foolish and lustful is king Dasaratha who is sending his beloved son to the forest for the sake of a woman'.
2::12::75:: '(Rama) already emaciated by observing vows related to ritual and celibacy in compliance with the orders of the preceptors has to undergo hardships again at a time when he should enjoy pleasures (of life)'.
2::12::76:: My son Rama will not say a second word to me, if I tell him 'Go to the forest'.He will say, 'Certainly so'. 
2::12::77:: If this scion of the Raghu race (Rama) urged to go to the forest acts against my order, it will be welcome but my son will not do it.
2::12::78:: The descendant of the Raghus (Rama) who is pure in thought will not come to know my intention. Therefore if I tell him 'Go to the forest,' he will say, 'Certainly so'.
2::12::79::If Rama goes to the forest, the god of death will conduct me to his abode, for condemned by the entire world, I shall not be forgiven (even by Yama). 
2::12::80:: With me dead and Rama, the best among men, banished, what harmful acts are you contemplating against my wellwishers? 
2::12::81::If queen Kausalya loses me, Rama, Lakshmana and Satrughna will follow me into death, unable to bear the grief. 
2::12::82::O Kaikeyi consign Kausalya, Sumitra, me and my three sons into hell and be happy.
2::12::83::You will rule undisturbed the Ikshvaku race honoured for its divine virtues. Now abandoned by me and Rama it will be afflicted with grief. 
2::12::84::If Rama's exile is approved by Bharata, then let him not perform my funeral rites after my death.
2::12::85::O my enemy, O wicked Kaikeyi, after Rama, the foremost of men, has left for the forest your desires will be fulfilled. And after my death, you as a widow along with your son will rule the kingdom.
2::12::86:: You lived in my palace under the name of a princess. You have brought me, for sure, unparalleled dishonour and disgrace. Everybody will look upon me with contempt as if I have committed a sinful act.
2::12::87::How will my son, Rama, who used to ride on chariots, elephants and horses roam the wilderness barefoot?
2::12::88:: How will my son for whom the cooks with kundalas in their ears used to proudly prepare enough food and beverages subsist on astringent, pungent, bitter wild fruits and roots? 
2::12::89::How will he who was habituated to wearing expensive apparels and to (royal) comforts over a long period of time live (sleep) on the ground, putting on saffron robes? 
2::12::90::Whose are these dreadful words, this inconceivable plan of Rama's exilement and Bharata's enthronement?
2::12::91:: A woman means one who secretly harms others. This is shameful indeed. They always seek selfish interests. I do not say this of all women, only of Bharata's mother.
2::12::92::O malicious one, O covetous one, O cruel one, O woman determined to torment me, what fault have you seen in Rama who is always devoted to the welfare of others?
2::12::93::This entire world will be inflamed to see Rama plunged in adversity. Fathers will abandon their sons. Wives, attached to their husbands, will forsake them.
2::12::94::When I see my son, handsome and welladorned like the son of a celestial deity, coming towards me, I rejoice. Even his very sight makes me grow young again. 
2::12::95::Nature's activity will continue even without the Sun or even if  Indra, wielder of the thunderbolt, sends no rain but none will live to see Rama departing to the forest. This is my conviction.
2::12::96::Alas I carried all along on my lap a highly poisonous female snake I gave you shelter while you were like death .This delusion is the cause of my ruin.You were my enemy. You wished me harm. You wished my destruction. 
2::12::97::With Rama and Lakshmana withdrawn from me, my kinsmen killed, let Bharata along with you rule the city and the kingdom causing delight to my enemies.
2::12::98::O cruelhearted woman, you strike one in adversity. Why are your teeth with which you are now speaking (such harsh words) do not fall to the ground, broken into a thousand fragments? 
2::12::99::How do you find fault with Rama who does not utter even one harmful or unpalatable word, who does not know how to use harsh words, and who speaks pleasingly and who is always honoured for his virtues? 
2::12::100::O obloquy on the house of Kekaya, you may grieve or burn yourself in the fire, or get  destroyed. Even if you fall down on earth broken into a thousand pieces I will not act on your terrible, harmful words.
2::12::101::You are like a knife. You always speak palatable lies. You are  malevolent. You are a destroyer of your own race. You displease the mind. You are intent on burning down all the links of my heart. I cannot bear to see you alive in this world.  
2::12::102:: There is no life for me without my son (Rama). What to speak of happiness again? Where is pleasure for a selfrespecting man like me? O queen, it does not behove you to do this harmful act. I will touch your feet. Show pity on me. 
2::12::103:: The king, with his heart in the grip of a woman, wailing like an orphan tried to reach her feet, exceeding the limit of selfrespect but, unable to touch them as she pulled them apart, he collapsed like a sick man.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्वादशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twelfth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
