2::93::1::On seeing the great army marching, the exited leaders of herds of elephants inhabiting the forest were frightened and ran off with their herds. 
2::93::2::Bears, herds of dappled gazelle and antelopes could be seen everywhere in the stretches of the forest, also on the mountains and on the river banks.
2::93::3::Bharata the righteous son of Dasaratha, proceeded with great delight in the company of the clamouring army of four divisions.
2::93::4::The army of the magnanimous Bharata, resembling the waves of the ocean, covered the earth as the clouds cover the sky during the rainy season.
2::93::5::At that moment, a multiutde of swift horses and elephants spread out with great speed and the surface of the earth became invisible for a long time.
2::93::6::With his draught animals extremely wearied by covering a great distance, the majestic Bharata said to Vasistha, the best of counsellors:
2::93::7::Looking at these surroundings and from what I had heard, it is clear that we have reached the region indicated by Bharadwaja.
2::93::8::This mountain is Chitrakuta and this river, Mandakini. The forest shines from a distance like a blue cloud.
2::93::9::The enchanting ridges of mount Chitrakuta are now trampled by my mountainlike elephants.
2::93::10::The trees on the mountain ridges are shedding flowers, like dense blue rainclouds showering water at the end of summer.
2::93::11::O Satrughna, behold this mountain frequented by kinneras and abounding in animals like great crocodiles in the ocean.
2::93::12::Incited by the clamour of the army, these swiftrunning herds of deer expelled from their retreats resemble mass of clouds in the autumnal sky shattered by the wind.
2::93::13::Like the people of the south, the trees on the mountain ridges with branches, brilliant like clouds, are crowned with fragrant flowers as adornments.
2::93::14::This forest, dreadful in appearance was devoid of twittering of birds. But now it appears to me like Ayodhya thronged with people.
2::93::15::While the dust kicked by the hooves of the horses enveloped the forest, the wind, as if to please me, is quickly blowing them away.
2::93::16::Behold, O Satrughna, these chariots, commanded by excellent charioteers,  harnessed with horses are flying through the forest.
2::93::17:: Behold, these lovely frightened peacocks and other birds hurriedly entering their nests.
2::93::18::Being the abode of ascetics, this region looks very charming like the pathway to heaven.
2::93::19::In this forest many a dappled deer with their mates looking as if painted with flowers are seen wandering about with a charming appearance. 
2::93::20::Let the soldiers set out and properly search the forest till such time the best of men, Rama and Lakshmana, are found.
2::93::21::Hearing the words of Bharata, those valiant warriors with weapons in their hands entered the forest. Therafter, they observed a spiral of smoke rising.
2::93::22:: Having seen the column of smoke, they returned and informed Bharata, saying, 'In a place bereft of men, fire cannot exist. Clearly Rama and Lakshmana must be here only.'
2::93::23::In case the two princes, Rama and Lakshmana, the best of men, and subduers of enemies are not residing here then evidently it must be some other ascetics like Rama.
2::93::24:: Having heard these words acceptable to the pious, Bharata, the crusher of enemy forces, addressed the entire army:
2::93::25::All of you carefully watch here. Do not proceed any further. Sumantra, the preceptor and myself shall go forward. 
2::93::26::At this command, all of them halted. Then Bharata fixed his gaze on the source of the smoke.
2::93::27::The army thus halted by Bharata, gazing at the space before them rejoiced at the thought that not long before they would rejoin their beloved Rama.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्रिनवतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the ninetythird sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
