2::65::1::अथ thereafter, रात्र्याम्  that night, व्यतीतायाम् had passed, अपरे on the following, अहनि day, प्रातः एव in the morning, परमसंस्काराः highly accomplished men, उत्तमश्रुताः proficient in learning, मङ्गलाश्च auspicious men, सूताः genealogists, स्तुतिशीलाः those versed in praising, गायकाः singers, वन्दिनः panegyrists, पृथक् पृथक् separately one by one, निगदन्तः reciting audibly, तत् that, पार्थिवनिवेशनम् palace of the king, पर्युपातिष्ठन् reached.
2::65::2::अथ thereafter, रात्र्याम्  that night, व्यतीतायाम् had passed, अपरे on the following, अहनि day, प्रातः एव in the morning, परमसंस्काराः highly accomplished men, उत्तमश्रुताः proficient in learning, मङ्गलाश्च auspicious men, सूताः genealogists, स्तुतिशीलाः those versed in praising, गायकाः singers, वन्दिनः panegyrists, पृथक् पृथक् separately one by one, निगदन्तः reciting audibly, तत् that, पार्थिवनिवेशनम् palace of the king, पर्युपातिष्ठन् reached.
2::65::3::उदात्ताभिहिताशिषाम् uttering benedictions at high pitch, राजानम् the king, स्तुवताम् those who were praising, तेषाम् their, स्तुतिशब्दः song of praise, प्रासादाऽभोगविस्तीर्णः spread over the entire palace, अवर्तत हि pervaded.
2::65::4::ततः then, तेषां सूतानाम् स्तुवताम् while the bards were singing the praise of the king, पाणिवादकाः those who praise clapping their palms, अवदानानि his wonderful deeds,  उदाहृत्य citing, पाणिवादान् claps, अवादयन् clapped.
2::65::5::तेन by that, शब्देन sound, शाखास्थाः some perched on the branches, पञ्जरस्थाः च and some in cages, ये राजकुलगोचराः found all over the palace, विहागाः birds, प्रतिबुद्धा: awoke, विसस्वनुः began to twitter.
2::65::6::व्याहृताः uttered, पुण्यशब्दाश्च sacred sounds, वीणानाम् of veena, निस्स्वनाः च notes also, गाथानाम् of hymns composed to metre, आशीर्गेयं च benedictory verses, तत् that, वेश्म house, पूरमायास filled.
2::65::7::ततः then, शुचिसमाचाराः observing purificatory practices, स्त्रीवर्ष धरभूयिष्ठाः many women  and eunuchs, पर्युपस्थानकोविदा: skilled to serve, यथापुरम् as usual, उपतस्थुः assembled.
2::65::8::स्नानशिक्षाज्ञाः those acquainted with bathing ceremonies, हरिचन्दन सम्पृक्तम् mixed with yellow sandal paste, उदकम् water, काञ्चनैः in golden, घटैः vessels, यथाकालम् at appropriate times, यथाविधि according to tradition, आनिन्युः brought.
2::65::9::तथा also, अन्याः some other, कुमारीबहुलाः with young maidens in large numbers, स्त्रियः women, मङ्गलालम्भनीयानि auspicious unguents, प्राशनीयाः articles gratifying to the senses, उपस्करान् articles necessary for completion of bathing ritual, उपनिन्युः brought.
2::65::10::तत् then, आभिहारिकम्  articles for the king, सर्वम् all, सर्वलक्षणसम्पन्नम् were of good quality, विधिवत् as per tradition, अर्चितम् बभूव (आभूत्) was adorable, सर्वम् everything, सुगुणलक्ष्मीवत्  excellent and auspicious
2::65::11::ततः then, सर्वम् all (attendants with necessary preparations), परिसमुत्सुकम् highly  enthusiastic, अनुपसम्प्राप्तम् without reaching the king, किंस्वित् इति as to what had happened, उपशङ्कितम् doubting, सूर्योदयं यावत् until the sunrise, तस्थौ waited.
2::65::12::अथ thereafter, याः स्त्रियः those women, कोशलेन्द्रस्य of the king of Kosala (Dasaratha's), शयनं प्रति attending on the bed, अनन्तराः with unrestricted movement, ताः तु those women, समागम्य on coming near, भर्तारम् that lord, प्रत्यबोधयन् and began waking him up.
2::65::13::तथापि even then, विनयेन with restraint, नयेन obediently, उचित वृत्ताः with agreeable  conduct, ताः those women, अस्य Dasratha's, शयनम् bed, स्पृष्ट्वा having touched, किञ्चित् अपि even a little, न उपलेभिरे did not perceive.
2::65::14::ताः स्त्रीयः those women, चेष्टासञ्चलनादिषु in actions, movements, etc, स्वप्नशीलज्ञाः who know the nature of sleeping men, ताः those women, राज्ञः king's, प्राणेषु regarding king's life, शङ्किताः apprehensive of, वेपथुपरीताः च trembling severely, प्रतिस्रोतस्त्रृणाग्राणाम् the tips of reeds standing against the current, सदृशम् like, सञ्चकाशिरे remained.
2::65::15::अथ thereafter, पार्थिवम् king, दृष्ट्वा च having seen, सन्देहमानानाम् suspicious, स्त्रीणाम्  women, यत् that, तत् this, पापम् evil, आशङ्कितम् apprehensive, तस्य its, विनिश्चय: certain, जज्ञे became.
2::65::16::पुत्रशोकपराजिते overpowered by grief on account of separation from the son, प्रसुप्ते fast asleep, कौशल्या च Kausalya, सुमित्रा च and Sumitra, कालसमन्विते यथा as if possessed by death, न प्रबुध्येते did not wake up.
2::65::17::निष्प्रभा च dull, विवर्णा pallid, शोकेन due to sorrow, सन्ना sunk down, सन्नता with limbs shrunk, कौशल्या Kausalya, तिमिरावृता enveloped by darkness, तारेव like stars, न व्यराजत did not shine.
2::65::18::राज्ञः of the king , अनन्तरम् by the side, देवी queen, कौशल्या Kausalya, तदन्तरम् next to her immediately, सुमित्रा Sumitra, शोकाश्रुलुलितानना with her face drooping (on account of shedding tears in sorrow), न स्म विभ्राजते devoid of lustre 
2::65::19::अन्तःपुरम् women in the inner apartment, तथा in that way, सुप्ते asleep, शुभे auspicious, ते देव्यौ the two queens, तम् that, नृपम् king, दृष्ट्वा having seen, सुप्तमेव as if asleep, उद्गत प्राणम् with lifebreath moving upward and leaving him dead, अमन्यत considered. 
2::65::20::ततः then, ताः वराङ्गनाः those women, अरण्ये in the forest, स्थानप्रच्युतयूथपाः the leader of the herd dislodged, करेणवः इव like the female elephants, दीनाः in distress, सस्वरम् loudly, प्रचुक्रुशुः wailed bitterly.
2::65::21::कौशल्या च Kausalya, सुमित्रा च Sumitra too, तासाम् their, आक्रन्दशब्देन by the sound of  their cries, सहसा suddenly, उद्धतचेतने recovering senses, त्यक्तनिद्रे बभूवतुः deserted their sleep.
2::65::22::कौशल्याच Kausalya, सुमित्रा च and Sumitra, पार्थिवम् the king,  दृष्ट्वाच having seen,स्पृष्ट्वा च having touched, हा नाथ इति Ah, lord, saying so, परिक्रुश्य crying loudly, धरणीतले on the floor, पेततुः fell down.
2::65::23::सा that, कोशलेन्द्रदुहिता daughter of the lord of Kosala, Kausalya, महीतले on the ground, वेष्टमाना rolling, रजोध्वस्ता coated with dust, गगनात् from the sky, च्युता fallen down, तारेव like a star, न बभ्राज did not shine.
2::65::24::नृपे when the king, शान्तगुणे जाते with his body lying still, सर्वाः all, ताः स्त्रीयः those women, भुवि on the earth, पतिताम् fallen, कौशल्याम्  at Kausalya, हताम् slain, नागवधूमिव like a female elephant, अपश्यन् beheld.
2::65::25::ततः then, कैकेयीप्रमुखाः led by Kaikeyi, नरेन्द्रस्य king's, स्त्रियः other wives, रुदन्त्यः weeping, शोकसन्तप्ताः burning with grief, गतचेतनाः having lost senses, निपेतुः fell down.
2::65::26::क्रोशन्तीभिः by the wailing ones, ताभिः by those women, अनुद्रुतः followed, बलवान् strong, loud, सः नादः that sound, येन by which, (भूयः) स्फीतीकृतम् made louder, तत् that, गृहम् house (palaces), समनादयत् reverberated.
2::65::27::दिष्टान्तम् demise, ईयुषः of him who reached, नरदेवस्य king's, तत् सद्म that palace, परित्रस्तन्त्रसम्भ्रान्त पर्युत्सुकजनाकुलम् thronged with anxious people who were exceedingly bewildered and frightened, सर्वतः all over, तुमुलाक्रन्दम् tumultuous with cries of agony, परितापार्तबान्धवम् with relatives anguished with distress, सद्यः at an instant, निपतितानन्दम् joy  vanished, दीनविक्लबदर्शनम् looked miserable with grief, बभूव became.
2::65::28::पत्नयः wives of the king, यशस्विनम् the illustrious, पार्थिवर्षभम् best of kings, अतीतम् him who has passed away, आज्ञाय realising, सम्परिवार्य surrounding him, सुदुःखिताः with intense sorrow, करुणम् piteously, भृशम् bitterly, रुदन्त्यः weeping, बाहू both their arms, प्रगृह्य holding, अनाथवत् like orphans, व्यलपन् bewailed.
