2::112::1::समवेताः those who had assembled, महर्षयः the great sages, अप्रतिमतेजोभ्यां of both men of  unparalleled brilliance, भ्रातृभ्याम् of brothers (Rama and Bharata), तम् that, रोमहर्षणम् thrilled, सङ्गमम् their meeting, प्रेक्ष्य witnessing, विस्मिताः were amazed.
2::112::2::अन्तर्हिताः remaining invisible, मुनिगणाः hosts of sages, सिद्धाश्च siddhas, परमर्षय: devarshis,  महात्मानौ magnanimous, भ्रातरौ brothers, तौ those two, काकुत्स्थौ Kakutsthas, प्रशशंसिरे lauded. 
2::112::3::धर्मज्ञौ practioners of righteousness, धर्मविक्रमौ whose strength is righteousness, द्वौ both, यस्य whose, पुत्रौ two sons, सः he (Dasaratha), धन्यः is fortunate, वयम् we, संभाषाम् their conversation, श्रुत्वा having heard, उभयोः in respect of both of them, स्पृहयामहे हि we are attached. 
2::112::4::ततः thereafter, क्षिप्रम् quickly, दशग्रीववधैषिणः men desiring the destruction of tenheaded Ravana, ऋषिगणाः hosts of rishis, राजशार्दूलम् best of kings, भरतम् Bharata, इति thus, वचः words, ऊचुः uttered. 
2::112::5::कुले जात O born in an illustrious race, महाप्राज्ञ O highly sagacious one, महावृत्त of virtuous conduct, महायशः O man of great renown, ते your, पितरम् father, अवेक्षसे यदि if you look at your father, रामस्य Rama's, वाक्यम् words, ग्राह्यम् have to be accepted. 
2::112::6::वयम् we, इमं रामम् this Rama, सदा always, पितुः as regards his father, अनृणम् free from debt, इच्छामहे we desire, दशरथः Dasaratha, कैकेय्याः to Kaikeyi, अनृणत्वाच्च by discharging his obligation, स्वर्गम् heaven, गतः ascended.
2::112::7::तदा then, समहर्षयः with great rishis, गन्धर्वाः gandharvas, राजर्षयश्चैव and royal sages, एतावत् upto this extent, वचनम् word, उक्त्वा having spoken, सर्वे all, स्वां स्वाम् to their respective, गतिम् abode, गताः went.
2::112::8::शुभदर्शनः of auspicious appearance, रामः Rama, शुभेन by the auspicious, तेन वाक्येन by that statement, ह्लादितः was gladdened, संहृष्टवदनः with delightful countenance, तान् ऋषीन् those rishis, अभ्यपूजयत् paid homage. 
2::112::9::सः भरतत्तु as for Bharata, त्रस्तगात्रः limbs trembling, कृताञ्जलिः with palms folded (in reverence), सज्जमानया got ready, वाचा words, पुनः again, राघवम् to Rama, इदं वाक्यम् these word, अब्रवीत् said.
2::112::10::काकुत्स्थ O Kakutstha, राजधर्मम् code of kings, कुलधर्मानुसन्ततिम् to abide by the traditional code of our family, अनुप्रेक्ष्य having considered, मम my, मातुश्च also mother's, याचनाम् supplication, कर्तुम् to do, अर्हसि behoves you. 
2::112::11::अहम् I, एकस्तु am alone, सुमहत् this vast, राज्यम् kingdom, रक्षितुम् to protect, रक्तान् loyal पौरजानपदान् inhabitants of the town and villages, रञ्जयितुम् to please, नोत्सहे I do not venture.
2::112::12::नः our, ज्ञातयश्च relatives, योधाश्च warriors, मित्राणि friends, सुहृदश्च wellwishers, त्वामेव you alone, कर्षकाः farmers, पर्जन्यमिव like rainbearing cloud, प्रतिवीक्षन्ते are longing. 
2::112::13::महाप्राज्ञ O sagacious one, इदं राज्यम् this kingdom, प्रतिपद्य after accepting, स्थापय establish, काकुत्स्थ Kakutstha, लोकस्य this world's, परिपालने in governance, शक्तिमान् असि  you are powerful. 
2::112::14::भरतः Bharata, तदा then, इति thus, उक्त्वा having said, भ्रातुः brother's, पादयोः at the feet, न्यपतत् fell, प्रियंवदः one who speaks sweetly, Bharata, रामम् एव Rama alone, भृशम्  profusely, सम्प्रार्थयामास entreated him.  
2::112::15::रामः Rama, श्यामम् dark complexioned, नलिनपत्राक्षम् man with eyes like lotus petals, मत्तहंस स्वरम् voice of  an amorous swan, तं भरतम् to that Bharata, स्वयम् personally, अङ्के into his lap, कृत्वा drawing, वचनम् these words, अब्रवीत् said. 
2::112::16::तातः O child, स्वजा innate, वैनयिकी च though training (received from a preceptor), या बुद्धि: such wisdom, त्वाम् you, आगता reached, पृथिवीम् to the earth, रक्षितुम् अपि even to protect, भृशम् perfectly, उत्सहसे you are capable. 
2::112::17::अमात्यैश्च with ministers, सुहृद्भिश्च with friends, बुद्धिमद्भि: with the prudent, मन्त्रिभिश्च   with the counsellors, सम्मन्त्र्य consulting, सुमहन्त्यपि however great they might appear, सर्वकार्याणि all endeavours, कारय you may get them done.  
2::112::18::चन्द्रात् from the Moon, लक्ष्मीः splendour, अपेयाद्वा might withdraw, हिमवान् Himavat mountain, हिमम् snow, त्यजेद्वा might abandon, सागरः ocean, वेलाम् its shores, अतीयात् might overstep, अहम् I, पितुः to father, प्रतिज्ञाम् promise, न shall not forsake. 
2::112::19::तात child, कामाद्वा either out of affection, लोभाद्वा or out of covetousness, मात्रा by your  mother, तुभ्यम् for your sake, इदम् this, कृतम् was done, तत् that, मनसि in your mind, न कर्तव्यम् should not be taken seriously, मातृवत् as to one's own mother, वर्तिव्यम् you should conduct.
2::112::20::भरतः Bharata, एवम् in this way, ब्रुवाणम् speaking, तेजसा in brilliance, आदित्यसङ्काशम्  resembling  the Sun, प्रतिपच्चन्द्रदर्शनम् appearance like the new Moon, कौसल्यासुतम् to the son of Kausalya, अब्रवीत् said. 
2::112::21::आर्य O noble one, हेमभूषिते decorated with gold, पादुके sandals, पादाभ्याम् from your feet, अधिरोह get into, एते these, सर्वलोकस्य of the entire world, योगक्षेमम् safety, विधास्यतः हि are going to secure. 
2::112::22::नरव्याघ्रः the best of men, सुमहातेजाः of great brilliance, सः that Rama, पादुके sandals, अधिरुह्य putting on, अवरुह्य च putting off, महात्मने to the magnanimous, भरताय to Bharata, प्रायच्छत् gave.
2::112::23::सः that Bharata, पादुके to the sandals, सम्प्रणम्य bowing down, रामम् to Rama, वचनम् words, अब्रवीत् said, परन्तप O tormentor of enemies, वीर O hero, रघुनन्दन Rama, अहम् I, चतुर्दश वर्षाणि fourteen years, जटाचीरधरः wearing matted locks and bark garments, फलमूलाशनः living on fruits and roots, तव your, पादुकयोः on your sandals, न्यस्तराज्यतन्त्रः placing the responsibility of ruling this kingdom, तव your, आगमनम् arrival, आकाङ्क्षन् looking forward, नगरात् from the city, बहिः outside, वसन् residing, भवेयम् I  shall remain. 
2::112::24::रघूत्तम O best of the Raghus, चतुर्दशे when fourteen, वर्षे years, संपूर्णे have passed, अहनि on that day, त्वाम् you, न द्रक्ष्यामि यदि if I do not behold, हुताशनम् blazing fire, प्रवेक्ष्यामि I shall enter. 
2::112::25::तथेति be it so, प्रतिज्ञाय having promised, तम् to that Bharata, सादरम् affectionately, परिष्वज्य having embraced, शत्रुघ्नम् Satrughna, परिष्वज्य having embraced, भरतं च also Bharata, इदम् these words, अब्रवीत् spoke.
2::112::26::रघुसत्तम O chief of the Raghus,  मातरम् mother, कैकेयीम् Kaikeyi, रक्ष protect, तां प्रति to her, रोषम् anger, मा कुरु do not show, मया च by me, सीतया चैव on Sita, शप्तः असि are being sworn, इति like this, उक्त्वा having said, अश्रुपरीताक्षः with the eyes filled with tears, भ्रातरम् brother, विससर्ज ह took leave of. 
2::112::27::प्रतापवान् the valiant, धर्मवित् knower of righteousness, सः भरतः that Bharata, स्वलङ्कृते welldecorated, ते those, पादुके sandals, सम्परिपूज्य having worshipped, राघवम् to Rama, प्रदक्षिणम् circumambulation, चकार performed, ते those sandals, उत्तमनागमूर्धनि atop the best of elephants, चकार made. 
2::112::28::अथ thereafter, राघववंशवर्धनः one who enhances the progeny of the Raghu dynasty, स्वधर्मे in his code of righteousness, हिमवान् Himavat, अचलः इव like the unshakable mountain, स्थिरः firm, तं जनम् those people, अनुपूर्व्या in accordance with their rank, प्रतिनन्द्य having greeted, गुरूंश्च to preceptors, मन्त्रिप्रकृतीः ministers and subjects, तथा like that, अनुजौ wishing his younger brothers Bharata and Satrughna, व्यसर्जयत् sent them forth. 
2::112::29::दुःखेन in their grief, बाष्पगृहीतकण्ठ्य throats choked with sobs, मातरः mothers, तम् to him, अमन्त्रयितुं to bid farewell, न शेकुर्हि were not able, सः that, राघवः एव Rama himself, सर्वाः all, मात़ृ़: mothers, अभिवाद्य paying obeisance, रुदन् weeping, स्वाम् his, कुटीं hut, प्रविवेश entered.
