2::60::1::ततः thereafter, कौशल्या Kausalya, भूतोपसृष्टेव as if possessed by an evil spirit, वेपमाना trembling, गतसत्त्वेव like one who has his senses lost, पुनः पुनः again and again, धरण्याम् on the floor, सूतम् to the  charioteer (Sumantra), अब्रवीत् said.
2::60::2::काकुत्स्थः Rama, सीता च Sita, यत्र wherever, लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, यत्र wherever, तत्र there, माम् to me, नय take, तान् विना without them, अत्र here,  क्षणमपि even for a moment, जीवितुम्  to live, अहम् I, न उत्सहे do not wish.
2::60::3::रथम् chariot, शीघ्रम् quickly, निवर्तय turn back, मामपि me also, दण्डकान् to Dandaka, नय  take, अथ if, तान् them, नानु गच्छामि if I do not follow, यमक्षयम् to the world of Yama, गमिष्यामि shall go.
2::60::4::सः सूतः that charioteer, बाष्पवेगोपहतया prevented by fastflowing tears, सज्जमानया faltering, वाचा with words, देवीम् to Kausalya, आश्वसयन् consoling, प्राञ्जलिः with folded palms, इदम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::60::5::शोकम् grief, मोहम् delusion, तथा also, दुःखजम् arising out of sorrow, सम्भ्रमं च despair, त्यज abandon, राघवः Rama, सन्तापम् difficulties, व्यवधूय after brushig aside, वने in the forest, वत्स्यति is going to live.
2::60::6::धर्मज्ञ: knower of duty, लक्ष्मणश्चापि also Lakshmana, वने in the forest, जितेन्द्रियः one whose senses are controlled, रामस्य to Rama' s, पादौ feet, परिचरन् serving at, परलोकम् the other world, आराधयति is accomplishing.
2::60::7::सीता Sita, विजने in the desolate, वनेपि in the forest also, गृहेष्विव like at home, वासम् living, प्राप्य having obtained, रामे in Rama, सन्न्यस्तमानसा with her mind fixed, अभीता without fear, विस्रम्भम् confidence, लभते  is getting.
2::60::8::अस्याः of her, सुसूक्ष्ममपि even the slightest, दैन्यम् dejection, किञ्चित् not even a little, कृतम् done, न लक्ष्यते not to be seen, वैदेही Sita, प्रवासानाम् for staying away from home, उचितेव as if accustomed, मा to me, प्रतिभाति appears.
2::60::9::सीता Sita, पुरा earlier, नगरोपवनम् to the pleasuregardens of the city, गत्वा having gone, यथा as, रमतेस्म was enjoying, निर्जनेषु in desolate, वनेष्वपि even in the forest, तथैव in the same way, रमते enjoying. 
2::60::10::रामा charming lady, रामे in Rama, अधीनात्मा one with absorbed mind, अबालचन्द्रनिभानना countenance resembling the full Moon, सीता Sita, विजने desolate, वने in the forest also, सती अपि staying, बालेव like a child, रमते is enjoying.
2::60::11::अस्याः her, हृदयम् heart, तद्गतम् united with Rama, जीवितं च life also, तदधीनम् under his control, अयोध्यापि even Ayodhya too, रामहीना without Rama, तदा then, तस्याः to her, वनम् forest, भवेत् would have become.
2::60::12::अयोध्या क्रोशमात्रे at the distance of a krosa from Ayodhya, विहारम् pleasuregarden, संश्रिता इव as if sporting, वैदेही Sita, ग्रामांश्च villages, नगराणि च cities,नदीनाम् rivers', गतिं च   courses, विविधान् different kinds of, पादपानपि trees also, दृष्ट्वा seeing, रामम् to Rama, परिपृच्छति enquiring, लक्ष्मणं वापि or Lakshmana, पृष्ट्वा asking, जानाति knowing. 
2::60::13::अस्याः her, इदमेव this much, स्मरामि I remember, सहसैव suddenly, उपजल्पितम् utterance, कैकेयी संश्रितम् about Kaikeyi, वाक्यम् words, इदानीम् now, मा to me, न प्रतिभाति does not come to my mind.
2::60::14::सूतः charioteer, प्रमादात् inadvertently, पर्युपत्स्थितम् uttered by all means, तद्वाक्यम् those words relating to Kaikeyi, ध्वंसयित्वा holding back, देव्याः to Kausalya, ह्लादनम् causing delight, मधुरम् pleasing, वचनम् words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::60::15::वैदेह्याः Sita's, चन्द्रांशु सदृशी resembling the beams of the Moon, प्रभा lustre, अध्वना on the way, वातवेगेन or by the speed of the wind, सम्भ्रमेण or due to haste, आतपेन च or due to scorching heat also, न विगच्छति does not fade.
2::60::16::वदान्यायाः of that munificent, वैदेह्याः Sita, शतपत्रस्य a hundredpetalled lotus, सदृशम् similar to, पूर्णचन्द्रोपमप्रभम् like the splendour of the full Moon, तत् वदनम् that countenance, न विकम्पते does not change at all.
2::60::17::अलक्तरसक्ताभौ shining red like the liquid lac, अलक्तरसवर्जितौ no longer tinted with such liquid, तस्याः her, चरणौ feet, अद्यापि even now, पद्मकोशसमप्रभौ are shining like the lotus buds.
2::60::18::भामिनी damsel (Sita), नूपुरोद्घुष्ट हेलेव tinkling anklets proclaiming dalliance, खेलम् (as if) playing, गच्छति going, वैदेही Sita, इदानीमपि even now, तद्रागात् due to affection for Rama, नयस्तभूषणा cast off the ornaments.
2::60::19::वनम् forest, आश्रिता resorted, रामस्य Rama's, बाहू arms, संश्रिता having taken refuge, गजं वा elephant, सिंहं वा or lion, व्याघ्रं वा or tiger, वीक्ष्य having seen, सन्त्रासं fear, नाऽहारयति does not get.
2::60::20::ते they, न शोच्याः need not be pitied, आत्मनः च yourself, न not, जनाधिप अपि king also, इदम् this, चरितम् history, लोके in the world, शाश्वतम् permanently, प्रतिष्ठास्यति will endure.
2::60::21::ते they, शोकम् grief, विधूय shaking off, परिहृष्टमानसाः with cheerful hearts, महर्षियाते  established by maharshis, पथि in the path, सुव्यवत्स्थिताः firmly fixed, वने in the forest, रताः  are enjoying, वन्यफलाशनाः subsisting on forest fruits, पितुः father's, शुभाम् auspicious, प्रतिज्ञाम् promise, परिपालयन्ति are upholding.
2::60::22::सुयुक्तवादिना by one who was speaking befittingly, सूतेना by Sumantra, तथा like that, निवार्यमाणापि though prevented, देवी queen Kausalya, सुतशोककर्शिता enfeebled with weeping over her son, प्रियेति 'O My beloved', पुत्रेति 'O my son', राघवेति च 'O Rama', कूजितात् from crying, नचैव विरराम did not stop.
