2::110::1::रामम् Rama, क्रुद्धम् as wrathful, आज्ञाय having perceived, वसिष्ठः Vasistha, प्रत्युवाच ह intercedes, जाबालिरपि Jabali also, अस्य लोकस्य to this world, गतागतिम् exits and entrances, जानीते is aware. 
2::110::2::त्वाम् to you, निवर्तयितुकामश्तु only with the intention to make you return, एतत् all this, वाक्यम् statement, उक्तवान् had spoken, लोकनाथ O lord of the worlds, इमाम् this,  लोकसमुत्पत्तिम् origin of the world, मे to (from) me, निबोध get yourself acquainted.
2::110::3::सर्वम् all, सलिलम् एव आसीत् all this was water, यत्र where, पृथिवी the earth, निर्मिता was  formed, ततः thereafter, स्वयंभूः the selfexistent, ब्रह्मा Brahma, दैवतैस्सह along with the gods, समभवत् came into existence. 
2::110::4::ततः then, सः he, वराहः in the form of a boar, भूत्वा becoming, वसुन्धराम् this earth, प्रोज्जहार uplifted, कृतात्मभिः by purified souls, पुत्रैः सह with sons, जगत् the world, असृजच्छ created.
2::110::5::शाश्वतः eternal, नित्यः changeless, अव्ययः imperishable, ब्रह्मा Brahma, आकाशप्रभवः arose from space (as his birthplace), तस्मात् from him, मरीचिः Marichi, सञ्जज्ञे was born, कश्यपः Kasyapa, मरीचेः Marichi's, सुतः son.
2::110::6::काश्यपात् from Kasyapa, विवस्वान् Vivaswat (Sun), जज्ञे was born, मनुः Manu, वैवस्वतः Vivaswat's, सुतः son, स तु as for him, पूर्वम् first, प्रजापतिः Prajapati, इक्ष्वाकुः Ikshvaku, मनोः Manu's, सुतः son.
2::110::7::यस्य to whom, प्रथमम् originally, समृद्धा prosperous, मही earth, मनुना by Manu, दत्ता was bestowed, तम् that, इक्ष्वाकुम् Ikshvaku, अयोध्यायाम् of Ayodhya, पूर्वकम् first, राजानम् king, विद्धि please know.
2::110::8::इक्ष्वाकोः Ikshaku's, सुतः son, श्रीमान् illustrious, कुक्षिरेवेति as Kukshi, विश्रुतः wellknown, अथ thereafter, कुक्षेः Kukshi's, आत्मजः son, वीरः heroic, विकुक्षिः Vikukshi, उदपद्यत was born. 
2::110::9::विकुक्षेः Vikukshi's, महातेजाः highly energetic, प्रतापवान् powerful, बाणः Bana, पुत्र: son, बाणस्य  to Bana, महाबाहुः mighty armed, महायशाः of great renown, अनरण्यः Anaranya was born.   
2::110::10::सताम् among the virtuous, वरे the best, अस्मिन् in this, अनरण्ये in Anaranya, महाराजे when he was king, अनावृष्टिः drought, न बभूव did not take place, दुर्भिक्षम् famine, न not, तस्करः thieves, कश्चन none, न not.
2::110::11::अनरण्यात् of Anaranya, महाबाहुः mightyarmed, पृथुः Prithu, राजा king, बभूव ह was born, तस्मात् पृथोः from that Prithu, त्रिशङ्कुः Trishanku, महाराजः great king, उदपद्यत was born, सः वीरः that heroic man, सत्यवचनात् on account of his truthfulness, सशरीरः with his physical  body, दिवम् heaven, गतः ascended. 
2::110::12::त्रिशङ्कोः to Trishanku, महायशाः of illustrious, दुन्धुमारः Dundhumara, सूनुः as son, अभवत् became, दुन्धुमारात् from Dundhumara, महातेजाः exceedingly powerful, युवनाश्वः Yuvanaswa, व्यजायत was born.
2::110::13::श्रीमान् majestic, मान्धाता Mandhata, युवनाश्वसुतः as Yuvanasva's son, समपद्यत was born, मन्धातुः to Mandhat, महातेजाः mighty, सुसन्धि Susandhi, उदपध्यत was born, सुसंधेरपि and to Susandhi, ध्रुवसंधिः Dhruvasandhi, प्रसेनजित् Prasenjit, द्वौ two, पुत्रौ sons, यशस्वी  renowned, रिपुसूदनः slayer of enemies, भरतः Bharata  ध्रुवसन्धेः born to Dhruvasandhi. 
2::110::14::महाबाहोः of the mightyarmed, भरतात् Bharata, असितो नाम named Asita, (अ)जायत was born, यस्य to him, हैहयाः Haihayas, तालजङ्घाश्च Talajanghas, शूराः indomitable, शशिबिन्दवश्च Sasibindus also, प्रतिराजानः rival kings, शत्रवः as enemies, उदपद्यन्त rose up. 
2::110::15::राजा the king, युद्धे in battle, तान् सर्वान् all of them, प्रतिव्यूह्य having engaged, प्रवासितः driven into exile, सः he, रम्ये in a delightful, शैलवरे on a tall mountain, अभिरतः contented, मुनिः sage, बभूव became. 
2::110::16::अस्य his, द्वे भार्ये two wives, गर्भिण्यौ बभूवतुः became pregnant, इति like this, श्रुतिः it is said, एका one, गर्भविनाशाय to destroy the embryo, सपत्नयै to her cowife, गरलम् poison, ददौ gave.
2::110::17::भार्गवः descendant of Bhrigu, च्यवनो नाम Chyavana by name, हिमवन्तम् Himavat mountain, उपाश्रितः had taken shelter, कालिन्दी Kalindi, तं ऋषिम् that rishi, समुपागम्य having approached, अभ्यवादयत् paid obeisance, सः विप्रः that brahmin, पुत्रजन्मनि for the birth of a son, वरेप्सुम् craving for a boon, ताम्  to her, अभ्यवदत् said.
2::110::18::देवि O queen, ते to you, महात्मा magnanimous, लोक विश्रुतः renowned in the world, धार्मिकश्च virtuous, सुशीलश्च of good conduct, वंशकर्ता perpetuator of the race, अरिसूदनः destroyer of enemies, पुत्र a son, भविता will be born.
2::110::19::सा देवी that queen, हृष्टा delighted, तं मुनिम् to that sage, प्रदक्षिणं circumambulation, कृत्वा  having made, अनुमान्य च taking leave of him, ततः then, गृहम् to home, आगम्य having returned, पद्मपत्रसमानाक्षम् with eyes like lotus petals, पद्मगर्भसमप्रभम् resplendent like Brahma, पुत्रम् son, व्यजायत gave birth. 
2::110::20::सपत्नया by her cowife, गर्भजिघांसया with a motive to destroy the embryo, तस्यै to her, गरः poison, दत्तः given, तेन for that reason, गरेण सहैव with poison, जातः born, सः he, सगरः Sagara, अभवत् became. 
2::110::21::सः he, सगरो नाम राजा a king, Sagara by name, यः who, इष्ट्वा having performed a sacrifice, पर्वणि on a fullmoon day, वेगेन swiftly, इमाः प्रजाः these men, त्रासयन्तम् frightening, समुद्रम्  the ocean, अखानयत् excavated. 
2::110::22::असमञ्जः Asamanja, सगरस्य Sagara's, पुत्रः son, अभूत् became, इति thus, नः for us, श्रुतम् heard, पापकर्मकृत् one who indulged in sinful deeds, सः he, जीवन्नेव while he was living in the kingdom, पित्रा by father, निरस्तः banished.
2::110::23::असमञ्जस्य Asamanja's, वीर्यवान् valiant, अंशुमानिति Anshuman by name, पुत्रः son, अभूत् was born, दिलीपः Dilipa, अंशुमतः Ansuman's, पुत्रः son, भगीरथः Bhagiratha, दिलीपस्य was son of Dilipa.
2::110::24::भगीरथात् from Bhagiratha, ककुत्स्थ: Kakutstha, येन by whom, काकुत्स्थाः as Kakutsthas, विश्रुताः are celebrated, ककुत्स्थस्य च to Kakutstha, रघुः Raghu, पुत्रः son, अभूत् was born, येन  by whom, राघवाः Raghavas 
2::110::25::रघोः Raghu, तेजस्वी illustrious, पुत्रः son, प्रवृद्धः has grown, पुरुषादकः Purushadaka, कल्माषपादः Kalmasapada, सौदासः Sowdasa, इत्येवम् like these, भुवि in this world, प्रथितः became famous. 
2::110::26::शङ्खणः Shankhana, इति thus, विश्रुतः is famous, कल्माषपादपुत्रः as son of Kalmashapada, अभूत् became, यः whoever, तद्वीर्यम् with that prowess, आसाद्य having been target acquired, सहसैन्यः with his army, व्यनीनशत् was destroyed. 
2::110::27::शङ्खणस्य to Shankhana, श्रीमान् glorious, सुदर्शनः Sudarshana, पुत्रः was his son, सुदर्शनस्य to Sudarshana, अग्निवर्णः Agnivarna, अग्निवर्णस्य to Agnivarna, शीघ्रगः Shighraga, शीघ्रगस्य to Shighraga, पुत्रः son, मरुः Maru, मरोः to Maru, पुत्रः son, प्रशुश्रुवः Prashushruva, प्रशुश्रुवस्य to Prashushruva, महाद्युतिः splendid, अम्बरीषः Ambarisha पुत्रः son, अभूत् was born, अम्बरीषस्य to Ambarisha, सत्यविक्रम: a man of real prowess, नहुषः Nahusha, पुत्रः son, अभूत् was born, नहुषस्य to Nahusha, परमधार्मिकः supremely righteous, नाभागः Nabhaga, पुत्रः son, नाभागस्य to Nabhaga, अजश्च Aja, सुव्रतश्चैव and Suvrata, उभौ two, सुतौ sons, धर्मात्मा rigtheous, राजा दशरथः king Dasaratha, अजस्यैव to Aja, सुतः son.
2::110::28::राम इति as Rama, अभिविश्रुतः known far and wide, तस्य that king's, दायादः an heir, ज्येष्ठः असि are the eldest son, नृपः O king, तत् for that reason, स्वकम् is your own, राज्यम् kingdom, गृहाण accept, जनम् the people, अवेक्षस्व look after. 
2::110::29::सर्वेषाम् for every one, इक्ष्वाकूणाम् among the Ikshvakus, पूर्वजः eldest son, राजा as king, भवति becomes, पूर्वजे when the eldest is there, अपरः younger one, न not, ज्येष्ठः पुत्रः the eldest son, राज्ये in the kingdom, अभिषिच्यते is consecrated. 
2::110::30::महायशः O illustrious Rama, सः that you, आत्मनः your, राघवाणाम् in house of Raghus, सनातनम् eternal, कुलधर्मम् family tradition, अद्य today, विहन्तुम् to abandon, नार्हसि does not behove you, प्रभूतरत्नाम् with abundance of treasures, प्रभूतराष्ट्राम् vast kingdom, मेदिनीम्  the earth, पितृवत् like your father, अनुशाधि rule. 
