2::116::1::भरते Bharata, प्रतिप्रयाते had departed, रामः Rama, तपोवने in the grove of ascetics, अथ then, तपस्विनाम् of ascetics, सोद्वेगम् filled with apprehension, औत्सुक्यम् eagerness (with intense desire to leave that forest), लक्षयामास observed. 
2::116::2::तत्र there, पुरस्तात् in front of, चित्रकूटस्य of Chitrakuta, तापसाश्रमे in the hermitage, रामम् Rama, आश्रित्य sought his protection, निरताः intent on staying, तान् them, उत्सुकान् anxious, अलक्षयत् observed. 
2::116::3::शङ्किताः suspicious, नयनैः with eyes, भृकुटीभिश्च by knitting their eyebrows, रामम् of Rama, निर्दिश्य glancing, अन्योन्यम् to each other, उपजल्पन्तः conversing, मिथः mutually, कथाः incidents, चक्रुः narrated. 
2::116::4::ततः then, रामस्तु as for Rama, तेषाम् their, औत्सुक्यम् anxiety, आलक्ष्य having observed, स्या स्वात्मनि in his mind, शङ्कितः suspecting, कृताञ्जलिः with folded palms in reverence,  कुलपतिम् the chief of the hermitage, ऋषिम् that sage, इदम् these words, उवाच said.
2::116::5::भगवत् O revered one, मयि in me, पूर्ववृत्तम् earlier conduct, किञ्चित् nothing, इदम् this, विकृतम् change, न दृश्यते कच्चित् not noticed, येन by what, तपस्विनः sages, विक्रियन्ते are perturbed. 
2::116::6::मे अवरजस्य my younger brother's, लक्ष्मणस्य of Lakshmana, प्रमादात् through inadvertance, आत्मनः himself, नानुरूपं unbefitting, चरितम् conduct, ऋषिभिः by sages, दृष्टं कच्चित् has  been seen. 
2::116::7::वः to you, शुश्रूषमाणा engaged in serving, मयि in me, शुश्रूषणपरा devoted to service, सीता by Sita, प्रमदाभ्युचिताम् befitting a woman, वृत्तिम् conduct, युक्तम् properly, न वर्तते कच्छित् is not following. 
2::116::8::अथ then, जरया in old age, वृद्धः grown old, तपसा च also in austerities, जराम् old age, गतः attained, ऋषिः ascetic, वेपमान इव as though trembling, भूतदयापरम् compassionate to all beings, रामम्  to Rama, उवाच said.  
2::116::9::तात O dear child, कल्याणसत्त्वायाः of a lady of auspicious nature, तथा also, कल्याणाभिरतेः  ever engaged in performing auspicious deeds, वैदेह्याः Sita's, चलनम् violation of duty, विशेषतः especially, तपस्विषु in respect of ascetics, कुतः how ?
2::116::10::त्वन्निमित्तम् for your sake, रक्षोभ्यः on account of  rakshasas, तापसान् to ascetics, इदम् this fear, प्रतिवर्तते तावत् is arising, तेन by that, संविग्नाः they are scared, मिथ: mutually, कथाः incidents, कथयन्ति are exchanging. 
2::116::11::तात O dear child, इह here, रावणावरजः Ravana's brother, धृष्टश्च impudent, जितकाशी च appearing victorious, नृशंसः cruel one, पुरुषादकः cannibal, अवलिप्तश्च haughty, पापश्च a sinner, खरो नाम by name Khara, जनस्थाननिकेतनान् residents of 'Janasthanam', सर्वान् all, तापसान् ascetics, उत्पाट्य having uprooted, त्वां च you also, न मृष्यते will not pardon. 
2::116::12::तात O dear child, त्वम् you, यदाप्रभृति from the time, अस्मिन् आश्रमे in this hermitage, वर्तसे started residing, तदाप्रभृति since that time, रक्षांसि rakshasas, तापसान् the ascetics,  विप्रकुर्वन्ति are tormenting. 
2::116::13::बीभत्सैः in distorted appearance, क्रूरैः by cruel, भीषणकैरपि by frightening, नानारूपैः in various forms, विरूपैश्च by deformaed appearance, विकृतदर्शनैः detestable looks, रूपैः in forms, दर्शयन्ति they exhibit. 
2::116::14::अनार्याः the wicked rakshasas, पुरतः in front of, स्थिताः standing, तापसान् ascetics, अप्रशस्तै: forbidden, अशुचिभिः dirty things, सम्प्रयोज्य employing, अपरान् some other ascetics, प्रतिघ्नन्ति are killing. 
2::116::15::अल्पचेतसः debased ones, तेषु तेषु in different, स्थानेषु in ashram sites, अबुद्धम् without being perceived, अवलीय च after concealing themselves, तत्र there, तापसान् the ascetics, नाशयन्तः while destroying, रमन्ते are taking delight. 
2::116::16::हवने the sacrifices, समुपस्थिते are about to commence, स्रुग्भाण्डान् the sacrificial ladels and vessels containing sacrificial materials, अवक्षिपन्ति throw away, वारिणा with water, अग्नीन्    the fire for oblation, सिञ्चन्ति are drenching, कलशांश्च waterpots, प्रमदेन्तीध्नन्ति destroy. 
2::116::17::अद्य now, ऋषयः sages, दुरात्मभिः by those beings of wicked nature, तैः by those rakshasas, अमृष्टान् infested with, आश्रमान् the hermitages, प्रजिहासवः those who want to flee, अन्यदेशस्य to another region, गमनाय to go, माम् me, चोदयन्ति are urging. 
2::116::18::राम O Rama, ते दुष्टाः those vile creatures, तपस्विषु to these sages, शारीराम् physical, उपहिंसाम् violence, पुरा दर्शयन्ति हि they show in the begining, तत् for that reason, इमम् आश्रमम् this ashram, त्यक्ष्यामः we are going to quit.  
2::116::19::इतः from here, अविदूरात् not very far, बहुमूलफलम् abounding in roots and fruits, चित्रम् वनम् lovely woods, अहम् I, पुनः again, सगणः with my companions, पुराणाश्रममेव the ancient ashram, श्रयिष्ये I will seek shelter. 
2::116::20::तात O dear child, खरः Khara, त्वय्यपि च with you also, अयुक्तम् improperly, पुरा प्रवर्तते   behaves at the outset, बुद्धि: प्रवर्तते यदि if you so like, इतः from here, अस्माभिः सह along with us, गच्छ you may go. 
2::116::21::राघव O Rama, नित्यम् always, यत्तस्य since for a man, समर्थस्यापि हि सतः even though  capable, सकलत्रस्य a man accompanied by his wife, ते to you, सन्देहः doubtful, अद्य now, इह here, वासः living, दुःखम् is painful. 
2::116::22::राजपुत्रः son of a king, राम Rama, इति thus, उक्तवन्तम् saying this, समुत्सुकम् anxious, तं तपस्विनम् that sage, उत्तरैः in the form of a reply, वाक्यैः by words, अवरोद्धुम् to hold him back, न शशाक was unable. 
2::116::23::सः कुलपतिः that chief of ascetics, राघवम् to Rama, अभिनन्द्य having greeted, समापृच्छ्य  having taken leave, समाधाय having convinced, कुलैस्सह along with his group, आश्रमम् hermitage, त्यक्त्वा after abandoning, जगाम  went. 
2::116::24::रामः Rama, तस्मात् देशात् from that region, अनुगमनात् by following them for some distance, ऋषिगणम् the sages, संसाध्य bidding them farewell, कुलपतिम् chief of the groups, ऋषिम् that sage, अभिवाद्य having paid obeisance, सम्यक् properly, प्रीतैः by the pleased, तैः by them, अनुमतः having been consented, उपदिष्टार्थः having grasped their instruction, वासाय to reside, पुण्यम् holy, स्वं निलयम् his own hermitage, उपसम्पेदे approached. 
2::116::25::प्रभुः the lord, सः राघवः that Rama, ऋषिविरहितम् deserted by the sages, आश्रमम् hermitage, क्षणमपि for a moment also, न जहौ did not leave, आर्षचरिते following the tradition of sages, धृतगुणाः fixed in many virtues, तापसाश्च even the sages, सततम् always, राघवम् to Rama, अनुगताः हि followed remained. 
