2::118::1::अनसूया one who is free from malice, सा वैदेही that Vaidehi, अनसूयया by Anasuya, एवम् in this way, उक्ता when  addressed, वचः those words, प्रतिपूज्य having worshipped, मन्दम् in a gentle tone, प्रवक्तुम् to tell, उपचक्रमे commenced. 
2::118::2:: त्वम् you, माम् to me, यत् अभिभाषसे you are instructing, एतत् all this, आर्यायाः for a noble lady like you, आश्चर्यम् wonder, न not, नार्या for a woman, पतिः husband, गुरुः the revered one, यथा as, एतत् all this, ममापि to me, विदितं तु also known. 
2::118::3::आर्ये O noble lady, एषः मम भर्ता my husband, वृत्तवर्जितः  devoid of good conduct, यद्यपि भवेत् even if it happens, तथापि even then, एषः he, मया by me, अद्वैधम् without hesitation, उपचर्तव्यः should be obeyed.
2::118::4::यः such a man, गुणश्लाघ्यः is worthy of applause for his virtues, सानुक्रोश: compassionate, जितेन्द्रियः subdued his senses, स्थिरानुरागः ever affectionate, धर्मात्मा righteous man, मातृवत् like a mother, पितृवत् like a father, प्रियः is dear, किं पुनः where is the need to say.
2::118::5::महाबलः mighty, रामः Rama, कौसल्यायाम् in Kausalya, यां वृत्तिम् such treatment, वर्तते behaves, अन्यासाम् with others, नृपनारीणामपि consorts of  the king, तामेव the same way, वर्तते behaves.
2::118::6::नृपवत्सलः affectionate towards king Dasaratha, धर्मवित् one who is conversant with righteousness, वीरः heroic Rama, नृपेण by king, सकृत् only once, दृष्टासु seen, स्त्रिष्वपि in any woman, मानम् pride, उत्सृज्य setting aside, मातृवत् like a mother, वर्तते abides. 
2::118::7::एवम् in this way, भयावहम् frightful, विजनम् desolate, वनम् forest, आगच्छन्त्याः when I was coming, मे to me, श्वश्वा by motherinlaw, समाहितम् imparted, तत् that, महत् wise instruction, हृदये in my heart, धृतम् is firmly grasped.
2::118::8::पुरा formerly, पाणिप्रदानकाले च at the time of bestowal of my hand to Rama, अग्नि सन्निधौ in the presence of sacrificial marriage fire, जनन्या by my mother, यत् वाक्यम् that word,  अनुशिष्टा आस्मि I have been taught, तदपि that also, मे to me, धृतम् hold
2::118::9::धर्मचारिणि O follower of righteous duty (Anasuya), ते वाक्यैः your words, तत् सर्वम् all that, नवीकृतम् renewed (reminded afresh), नार्याः for women, पतिशुश्रूषणात् more than obedience to her husband, अन्यत् other, तपः ascetic practice, न विधीयते is not laid down. 
2::118::10::पतिशुश्रूषाम् service to her husband, कृत्वा having rendered, सावित्री Savitri, स्वर्गे in heaven, महीयते is honoured, तथावृत्ति: having followed the same path, त्वं च you also, पतिशुश्रूषया through serving your husband, दिवम् to heaven, याता shall go. 
2::118::11::सर्वनारीणाम् among  all women, वरिष्ठा the very best, देवता goddess, एषा रोहिणी this Rohini, दिवि in the sky, चन्द्रं विना without the Moon, मुहूर्तमपि even for a moment, न दृश्यते is not seen. 
2::118::12::एवंविधाः such women, प्रवराः excellent, भर्तृदृढव्रताः firm in their vows to their husbands, स्त्रियः women, पुण्येन by merit, स्वेन by their own, कर्मणा deeds, देवलोके in the world of the gods, महीयन्ते are highly revered. 
2::118::13::ततः thereafter, सीतया by Sita, उक्तम् spoken, वचः words, श्रुत्वा having heard, अनसूया Anasuya, संहृष्टा highly rejoiced, मैथिलीम् to Sita, शिरसि on her forehead, अघ्राय having kissed, हर्षयन्ती in order to make her happy, उवाच said. 
2::118::14::शुचिव्रते O woman of pure conduct, सीते O Sita, विविधैः by various, नियमैः by austerities, आप्तम् obtained, महत् great, तपः ascetic power, मे to me, अस्ति हि is there to my credit, तत् बलम् that ascetic power, संश्रित्य having resorted to, त्वाम् you, छन्दये I shall cause your enjoyment. 
2::118::15::मैथिलि O Sita, तव वचनम् your words, उपपन्नम् are befitting, मनोज्ञं च also pleasing, प्रीता आस्मि I am pleased, उचितम् appropriate thing, किं what, ते to you, करवाणि shall I do, मे to me, ब्रवीहि  tell.
2::118::16::सीता Sita, तस्याः her, तद्वचनम् those words, शुत्वा having heard, विस्मिता was surprised, मन्दविस्मया with a gentle smile, तपोबलसमन्विताम् endowed with ascetic power, कृतमिति has been done, अब्रवीत् said.
2::118::17::धर्मज्ञा knower of righteous ways, सा she (Anasuya), तया by Sita, एवम् in this way, उक्ता having been addressed, प्रीततरा अभवत् she was immensely pleased, सीते O Sita, हन्त what a joy, प्रहर्षम् my delight, ते to you, सफलम् fruitful, अहम् I, करोमि shall do.
2::118::18::वैदेहि O princess of Videha, सीते Sita, दिव्यम् divine, वरम् best, इदं माल्यम् this garland,  वस्त्रम् raiment, आभरणानि च jewellery, अङ्गरागं च fragrant unguents, महार्हम् precious, अनुलेपनं च ointment for anointing the body, मया by me, दत्तम् is bestowed, इदम् all this, तव to your, गात्राणि limbs, शोभयेत् will beautify, नित्यम् always, अनुरूपम् convenient, असंक्लिष्टम् भविष्यति will never impair.  
2::118::19::जनकात्मजे O daughter of Janaka, दिव्ये O divine lady, अङ्गरागेण with fragrant unguent, लिप्ताङ्गी anointing to your body, श्रीः Lakshmi, अव्ययम् imperishable, विष्णुम् Vishnu, यथा how, भर्तारम् your husband, शोभयिष्यसि you will enhance the glory. 
2::118::20::सा मैथिली that princess from Mithila, वस्त्रम् raiment, अङ्गरागं च fragrant unguent, भूषणानि jewellery, तथा and, स्रजः garlands, अनुत्तमम् incomparable, प्रीतिदानम् gifts of love, प्रतिजग्राह accepted.
2::118::21::यशस्विनी illustrious lady, सीता Sita, तत् that, प्रीतिदानम् gifts of love, प्रतिगृह्य having accepted, श्लिष्टाञ्जलिपुटा with hands folded like a dish in reverence, तत्र there, तपोधनाम्  ascetic, समुपास्त sat beside her. 
2::118::22::दृढव्रता firm in her vows, अनसूया Anasuya, तथा in that way, उपासीनाम् sitting, सीताम् Sita, कांचित् certain, प्रियकथामनु relating to a dear tale (that was close to her heart), प्रष्टुम् to ask, वचनम् these words, आरेभे commenced.
2::118::23::सीते O Sita, त्वम् you, यशस्विना by the illustrious one, राघवेण by Rama, स्वयंवरे in the swayamvara (the choice of the husband by a princess in the public), प्राप्ता किल are obtained, इति कथा so runs the story, मे my, श्रुतिम् my ear, उपागता reached.
2::118::24::मैथिलि O daughter of the king of Mithila,  ताम् that story,  विस्तरेण in detail, श्रोतुम् to hear, इच्छामि I wish, तत् that one, त्वम् you, यथाऽनुभूतम् as you experienced, कात्स्न्येन entirely, वक्तुम् अर्हसि  you should tell me.
2::118::25::एवम् thus, उक्ता  addressed, सा सीता that Sita, ततः then, श्रूयताम् इति  listen, उक्त्वा having said, ताम् that, धर्मचारिणीम् to one who practiced righteousness, तां कथाम् that story, कथयामास related. 
2::118::26::मिथिलाधिपतिः king of Mithila, वीरः a warrior, धर्मवित् one conversant wtih righteousness, जनको नाम by name Janaka, क्षत्रधर्मे in the duties of kshatriya, अभिरतः engaged, न्यायतः  rightly, मेदिनीम् this earth, शास्ति was ruling. 
2::118::27::तस्य his, लाङ्गलहस्तस्य of a man holding a plough in hand, क्षेत्रमण्डलम् the circular plot of land for performing sacrifice, कर्षतः while ploughing, अहम् I, नृपतेः king's, सुता as daughter, जगतीम् the earth, भित्वा breaking, उत्थिता किल arose, as they say.
2::118::28::मुष्टिविक्षेपतत्परः eager to sow fistfuls of seeds, नरपतिः king, सः जनकः that Janaka, पांसुकुण्ठितसर्वाङ्गीं with my body covered with dust, माम् me, दृष्ट्वा having seen, विस्मितः अभवत् was astonished.
2::118::29::अनपत्येन being childless, स्वयम् himself, स्नेहात् out of affection, अङ्कम् in his lap, आरोप्य placing, इयम् this one, मम तनया is my daughter, इति thus, उक्त्वा having said, मयि in me,  स्नेहः affection, निपातितः showered
2::118::30::नरपते O king, एतत् this, एवम् in this way, अप्रतिमा incomparable, अमानुषी not a human being, तव to you, धर्मेण by right, तनया daughter, अन्तरिक्षे from out of the sky, वाक् word, उक्ता  was uttered.  
2::118::31::ततः thereafter, धर्मात्मा righteous, नराधिप: the king, मिथिलाधिपः the lord of Mithila, मे पिता my father, प्रहृष्टः was delighted, माम् me, अवाप्य having got, विपुलाम् noble, बुद्धिम् thought, अवाप्तः obtained. 
2::118::32::पुण्यकर्मणा by a man of meritorious acts, ज्येष्ठायै to the chief, देव्यैः queen, इष्टवत् as the choicest one, दत्ता अस्मि I was given, स्निग्धया by a lady endowed with affection, तया by her, मातृसौहृदात् with the love of a mother, सम्भाविता अस्मि I was nourished.
2::118::33::मे पिता my father, पतिसंयोगसुलभम् a proper time for uniting with a husband, वयः age,         दृष्ट्वा having observed, दीनः desolate, वित्तनाशात् due to loss of wealth, अधनः इव like an poor man, चिन्ताम् sorrow, अभ्यगमत् obtained.
2::118::34::भुवि on earth, शक्रेण with Indra, समोऽपि though equal, कन्यापिता the father of an unmarried girl, सदृशाः equal, अपकृष्टात् by an inferior, जनात् from men, लोके in this world, प्रधर्षणाम् humiliation, अवाप्नोति will receive. 
2::118::35::पार्थिवः the king, तां धर्षणाम् that humiliation, आत्मनि in him, अदूरस्थाम् not very far, दृष्ट्वा having observed, चिन्तार्णवगतः submerged in a sea of sorrow, अप्लवो यथा like one without a float, पारम् the shore, नाससाद did not reach.
2::118::36::महीपालः the ruler of earth, माम् me, अयोनिजाम् not born from the womb, ज्ञात्वा having known, मम for me, सदृशम् equal, अनुरूपं च suitable, पतिम् husband, विचिन्तयन् thinking over, नाध्यगच्छत् did not find. 
2::118::37::सन्ततम् constantly, चिन्तयानस्य pondering deeply, धीमतः wise, तस्य his, तनूजायाः for the daughter, स्वयंवरम् swayamvara, करिष्यामि I shall perform, इति thus, इयं बुद्धि: this thought, जाता was born. 
2::118::38::तदा then, महायज्ञे at a great sacrifice, तस्य to him, महात्मना by the magnanimous, वरुणेन by Varuna, प्रीत्या with affection, धनुर्वरम् an excellent bow, दत्तम् was given, अक्षयसायकौ with two inexhaustible arrows, तूणी च and two quivers. 
2::118::39::गौरवात् because of weight, मनुष्यैः by a human, यत्नेनापि even with great effort,  असञ्चाल्यम् cannot be moved, तत् that bow, नराधिपाः lords of men, स्वप्नेष्वपि even in their dreams, नमयितुम् to bend, न शक्ताः were not capable.
2::118::40::सत्यवादिना by a truthful man, मे पित्रा by my father, पूर्वम् previously, पार्थिवान् kings, आमन्त्र्य having invited, नरेन्द्राणाम् of kings, समवाये in the assembly, तत् धनुः that bow, प्राप्य having acquired, व्याहृतम् addressed them.
2::118::41::यः नर: any man, इदं धनुः this bow, उद्यम्य having lifted, सज्यं च string the bow, कुरुते who could do, तस्य to him, मे दुहिता my daughter, भार्या wife, भविष्यति shall become, संशयः न no doubt about it.
2::118::42::नृपाः the kings, गौरवात् due to heavy weight, गिरिसन्निभम् resembling a mountain, तत् धनुः श्रेष्ठम् that mighty bow, दृष्ट्वा beholding, तस्य its, तोलने in lifting, अशक्ताः were unable, अभिवाद्य paying obeisance, जग्मुः went away. 
2::118::43::सुदीर्घस्य कालस्य after a long time, राघवः Rama, महाद्युतिः resplendent, सत्यपराक्रमः whose prowess was truth, अयं रामः this Rama, भ्रात्रा with his brother, लक्ष्मणेन सह along with Lakshmana, विश्वामित्रेण सहितः together with Viswamitra, यज्ञम् the sacrifice, द्रष्टुम् to observe, समागतः arrived.
2::118::44::धर्मात्मा the righteous man, विश्वामित्रस्तु as for Viswamitra, मम पित्रा by my father, सुपूजितः wellhonoured, तत्र there, भ्रातरौ brothers, रामलक्ष्मणौ to Rama and Lakshmana, पितरम् to my father, प्रोवाच uttered. 
2::118::45::दशरथस्य king Dasaratha's, सुतौ sons, इमौ both these, धनुर्दर्शकाङ्क्षिणौ are desirous of seeing the bow, राजपुत्राय to this king's son, रामाय to Rama, दैविकम् divine, धनुः bow, दर्शय show. 
2::118::46::तेन विप्रेण by that ascetic, इति thus, उक्तः uttered, ततो then, धनुः bow, उपानयत् brought,  महाबलः mighty one, वीर्यवान् valiant man, निमेषान्तरमात्रेण in the twinkling of an eye, तत् that one, आनम्य having bent, झडिति instantly, ज्याम् the string, समारोप्य pulling it, पूरयामास drew it.
2::118::47::पूरयता while stringing, तेन by Rama, वेगात् with force, धनुः bow, मध्ये in the middle, द्विधा into two, भग्नम् was broken, तस्य its, भीमः dreadful, शब्दः sound, पतितस्य fallen, अशनेरिव like that of a thunder, अभवत् arose.
2::118::48::ततः then, तत्र there, सत्याभिसन्धिना by one steadfast in truth, पित्रा by my father, उत्तमम् pure, जलभाजनम् watervessel, उद्यम्य having raised, अहम् I, रामाय to Rama , दातुम् to give, निश्चिता decided.
2::118::49::तदा then, राघवः Rama, अयोध्याऽधिपतेः of the king of Ayodhya, प्रभोः lord, पितुः his father's, छन्दम् opinion, अविज्ञाय without knowing, दीयमानाम् being offered by father, न तु प्रतिजग्राह did not accept.
2::118::50::ततः then, मम पित्रा by my father, श्वशुरम् fatherinlaw, वृद्धम् aged, दशरथं नृपम् king Dasaratha, आमन्त्र्य having invited, अहम् I, विदितात्मन: of a man who is known for his sagacity, रामाय to Rama, दत्ता I was given. 
2::118::51::मम my, अनुजा younger sister, साध्वी chaste, प्रियदर्शना pleasing appearance, ऊर्मिला Urmila, भार्यार्थे as wife, मम पित्रा by my father, स्वयम् of his own accord, लक्ष्मणस्यापि for Lakshman, दत्ता was given. 
2::118::52::तदा then, तस्मिन् स्वयंवरे in that swayamvara, रामाय for Rama, एवम् in this way, दत्ता अस्मि was bestowed, वीर्यवताम् among valiant, वरम् foremost, पतिम् husband, धर्मेण in accordance with righteousness, अनुरक्ता अस्मि I remain devoted. 
