2::66::1::संशान्तम् pacified, अग्निमिव like blazing fire, अम्बुहीनम् without water, अर्णवमिव like the ocean, हतप्रभम् bereft of brightness, आदित्यमिव like the Sun, स्वर्गस्थम् ascended heaven, तं पार्थिवम् that king, प्रेक्ष्य on seeing, कौशल्या Kausalya, बाष्पपूर्णाक्षी with her eyes filled with tears, विविधाम् in several ways, शोककर्शिता emaciated with sorrow, राज्ञः king's, शिरः head, उपगृह्य having grasped, कैकेयीं प्रति looking at Kaikeyi, अभाषत uttered.
2::66::2::संशान्तम् pacified, अग्निमिव like blazing fire, अम्बुहीनम् without water, अर्णवमिव like the ocean, हतप्रभम् bereft of brightness, आदित्यमिव like the Sun, स्वर्गस्थम् ascended heaven, तं पार्थिवम् that king, प्रेक्ष्य on seeing, कौशल्या Kausalya, बाष्पपूर्णाक्षी with her eyes filled with tears, विविधाम् in several ways, शोककर्शिता emaciated with sorrow, राज्ञः king's, शिरः head, उपगृह्य having grasped, कैकेयीं प्रति looking at Kaikeyi, अभाषत uttered.
2::66::3::नृशंसे O cruel one, दुष्टचारिणि O perverse wretch, कैकेयि O Kaikeyi, सकामा भव remain with your wishes fulfilled, राजानम् king, त्यक्त्वा forsaking, एकाग्रा with one objective, अकण्टकम् without any obstacle, राज्यम् kingdom, भुङ्क्ष्व enjoy.
2::66::4::रामः Rama, माम् me, विहाय having left, गतः has gone, मम my, भर्ता च lord also, स्वर्गतः has  ascended heaven, विपथे on a wrong path, सार्थहीनेव without wellwishers अहम् I, जीवितुम् to live, न उत्सहे do not desire.
2::66::5::त्यक्तधर्मणः one who has abandoned righteousness, कैकेय्याः अन्यत्र other than Kaikeyi, का स्त्री which woman, आत्मनः her own, दैवतम् god, तं भर्तारम् her husband, परित्यज्य having abandoned, जीवितुम् to live, इच्छेत् desires.
2::66::6::लुब्ध: a greedy man, किम्पाकम् a poisonous fruit of bad taste, भक्षयन्निव as if one has eaten, दोषान् faults, न बुध्यते does not know, कुब्जानिमित्तम् on account of the hunchback, कैकेय्या by Kaikeyi, राघवाणाम् of Raghus, कुलम् race, हतम् is destroyed.
2::66::7::सभार्यम् with wife, रामम् Rama, अनियोगे is an unworthy act, नियुक्तेन ordered, राज्ञा by the king, विवासितम् has been banished, श्रुत्वा having heard, जनकः Janaka, अहं यथा like me, परितप्स्यति will suffer.
2::66::8::धार्मिकः virtuous, कमलपत्राक्षः who has lotuspetal like eyes, जीवन् even though alive, इतः from here, नाशम् destruction, गतः obtained, सः रामः that Rama, अद्य now, माम् me, अनाथाम्  without protector, विधवाम् without husband, न जानाति does not know.
2::66::9::तथा also, तपस्विनी a miserable woman, दुःखस्य of hardships, अनुचिता unworthy, विदेहराजस्य king Videha's, सुता daughter, सीता Sita, वने in the forest, दुःखम् great sorrow, पर्युद्विजिष्यति will be agitated in her mind.
2::66::10::निशाम् at night, भीमघोषाणाम् ghastly sounds, मृगपक्षिणाम् of animals and birds, नदताम् by those making sounds, निशम्य having heard, सन्त्रस्ता frightened, नूनम्  surely, राघवम् Rama, संश्रयिष्यति will take shelter.
2::66::11::वृद्धश्चैव aged, अल्पपुत्रश्च not having sons, सोऽपि that Janaka too, शोकसमाविष्टः  overpowered by grief, वैदेहीम् Sita, अनुचिन्तयन् constantly thinking, जीवितम् life, त्यक्ष्यति ननु will give up indeed. 
2::66::12::पतिव्रता of faithful wife, सा अहम् such as myself, अद्यैव now itself, दिष्टान्तम् death, गमिष्यामि will go to, इदम् this, शरीरम् body, आलिङ्ग्य clasping, हुताशनम् in the fire, प्रवेक्ष्यामि I shall enter. 
2::66::13::व्यावहारिकाः maidservants (those who customarily attend on the queens), सम्परिष्वज्य  having embraced, विलपन्तीम् lamenting, तपस्विनीम् unfortunate, सुदुःखार्ताम् deeply distressed, तां कौशल्याम् to that Kausaya, ततः from there, व्यपनीय removed. 
2::66::14::अथ thereafter, आदिष्टाः having been instructed, अमात्याः counsellors, जगतीपतिम् the (corpse) of the lord of the world (Dasartha), तैलद्रोण्याम् in an oil tub, संवेश्य keeping, अनन्तरम् thereafter, कर्माणि ceremonies, सर्वाणि all, चक्रुः performed.
2::66::15::सर्वज्ञाः conversant with all such matters (relating to the obsequies), मन्त्रिणः counsellors, विना पुत्रेण without sons, राज्ञः king's, सङ्कलनम् funeral obsequies, कर्तुम् to do, न ईषुः did not desire, ततः then, भूमिपम् king's body, रक्षन्ति they are protecting.
2::66::16::सचिवैः by counsellors, तैलद्रोण्याम् in the oil vat, शायितम् made to lay down, तं नराधिपम् that king, ज्ञात्वा on knowing (having seen), हा alas, अयम् this, मृतः is dead, इति in this way, ताः those, स्त्रियः women, पर्यदेवयन् cried.
2::66::17::नेत्रप्रस्रवणैः tears flowing from their eyes, मुखैः with faces, कृपणाः piteously, बाहून् hands, उद्यम्य raising, रुदन्त्यः groaning, शोकसन्तप्ताः burning in grief, कृपणम् helplessly, पर्यदेवयन् lamented.
2::66::18::हा महाराज Alas, the great king, सततम् always, प्रियवादिना by a man speaking pleasing words, सत्यसन्धेन by one firm in promise, रामेण by Rama, विहीनाः deprived of, नः us, किमर्थम् why, विजहासि are you leaving us?
2::66::19::राघवेण by Rama, वियोजिताः separated, वयम् we, विधवाः widows, दुष्टभावायाः one of evil intentions, पतिघ्नयाः slayer of husband, कैकेय्याः Kaikeyi, समीपे near, कथम् how?, वत्स्याघ्नयाम can we stay?
2::66::20::अस्माकम् for us, तव च to you also, सदा always, नाथः protector, प्रभुः master, आत्मवान्  selfpossessed, श्रीमान् prosperous, सः that, रामः Rama, नृपतिश्रियम् royal wealth, विहाय leaving, वनम् to the forest, गतः हि has gone indeed.
2::66::21::त्वया विना without you, तेन वीरेण विना without that hero, व्यसनमोहिताः overwhelmed with grief, वयम् we, कैकेय्या by Kaikeyi, विदूषिताः च having being abused, कथम् how, निवत्स्यामः can we live? 
2::66::22::यया by such a person (Kaikeyi), राजा the king, रामश्च Rama, महाबलः valiant, लक्ष्मणश्च  also Lakshmana, सीतया सह along with Sita, सन्त्यक्ताः have been abandoned, सा that Kaikeyi, अन्यम् other, कम् whom, न हास्यति will not cast aside?
2::66::23::राघवस्य Dasaratha's, ताः वरस्त्रियः those excellent wives, बाष्पेण shedding tears, विपुलेन  with profound, शोकेन च grief, संवीताः overwhelmed, निरानन्दाः cheerlessly, व्यवेष्टन्त are lying unconscious on the  floor.
2::66::24::महात्मना by the great, राज्ञा king, हीना deprived, अयोध्यापुरी city of Ayodhya, चन्द्रविहीना devoid of moon, निशेव night, भर्तृविवर्जिता forsaken by husband, स्त्रीव like woman, नाराजत  did not shine. 
2::66::25::बाष्पपर्याकुलजना filled with people shedding tears, हाहाभूतकुलाङ्गना with the cries of anguish of housewives, शून्यचत्वरवेश्मान्ता infront of their houses and the public squares in between the houses, यथा पुरम् city with its earlier brilliance, न बभ्राज does not shine.
2::66::26::नराधिपे when the king, शोकात् due to grief, त्रिदिवम् towards heaven, गते तु having gone, नृपाङ्गनासु wives of the king, महीतलस्थासु च lying on the ground, रविः the Sun, सहसा instantly, निवृत्तचारः ceased his journey, गतः gone, प्रवृत्तचाराः favourable to nightrangers, रजनी night, उपस्थिता set in.
2::66::27::समागताः people who assembled there, सुहृदः friends, पुत्रात् ऋते in the absence of a son, महीपतेः king's, दहनम् for igniting funeral pyre, न रोचयन्ते do not agree, इतीव thus, विचिन्त्य  having thought, अचिन्त्य दर्शनम् in an unexpected form, राजानम् king, तस्मिन् शयने on that bed (in that oil trough), न्यवेशयन् laid.
2::66::28::महात्मना by the great Dasaratha, रहिता bereft of, अस्रकण्ठाकुलमार्गचत्वरा courtyards in front of their houses and the squares on the roads filled with people sobbing, पुरी Ayodhya, भास्करं विना without the Sun, द्यौरिव like the sky, व्यपेतनक्षत्रगणाः with crowds of stars, शर्वरीव like night, गतप्रभा having lost the brightness, न बभासे did not shine.
2::66::29::तदा then, नरदेवसङ्क्षये after the demise of the king, नगर्याम् in the city, नराश्च men, नार्यश्च women, सङ्घशः in groups, समेत्य assembled, भरतस्य Bharata's, मातरम् mother, विगर्हमाणाः denounced, आर्ताः बभूवुः became extremely distressed, शर्म peace, न च लेभिरे did not have 
