2::39::1::After hearing  Rama and beholding him in the robes of  an ascetic, Dasaratha and his wives fell unconscious. With his body and mind afflicted with grief, Dasaratha could not look Rama in the face nor could he make a reply. 
2::39::2::After hearing  Rama and beholding him in the robes of  an ascetic, Dasaratha and his wives fell unconscious. With his body and mind afflicted with grief, Dasaratha could not look Rama in the face nor could he make a reply. 
2::39::3::The mightyarmed king lost consciousness for a moment and in grief lamented, brooding only over Rama.
2::39::4::'In the past I must have separated many from their children or harmed many living beings. That is why I think this calamity has befallen me.
2::39::5::Unless the destined hour arrives, life does not leave the body. Therefore, even though I am tormented by Kaikeyi and even after seeing my son, standing before me, (bright) like fire, taking off his fine clothes and wearing the robes of an ascetic my end does not come. 
2::39::6:: Only because of Kaikeyi  who resorted to this deception in pursuit of selfish ends so many people are made to suffer.
2::39::7::Having uttered these words and muttering, 'O Rama' only once, his vision blurred by tears, he could speak no more.
2::39::8:: Regaining his senses in a moment, the king, with eyes filled with tears, said to Sumantra:  
2::39::9:: Harness the finest horses to the chariot suitable for the journey, drive this magnanimous Rama to a place outside the city, and come back.
2::39::10::That the pious and heroic son is banished by his parents to the forest is, I think, the reward to the virtuous for his virtues.
2::39::11::In obedience to the words of the king, Sumantra promptly harnessed the horses to a welldecorated chariot and brought it there.
2::39::12:: With folded palms Sumantra informed the prince that a chariot, decked in gold and harnessed with excellent horses, is ready.  
2::39::13:: The king who was aware of the right place and time summoned hurriedly the treaury officer, who was firm and honest and said to him:
2::39::14:: Assess the (needs for) number of years the princess of Videha (Sita) is going to be in the forest, and fetch her quickly highly valuable garments and excellent ornaments.
2::39::15::Ordered thus by the king, the officer went to the treasury, collected all the things and presented them to Sita.
2::39::16:: That princess of noble birth from Videha adorned her beautiful limbs with the sparkling ornaments and got ready to depart for the forest.
2::39::17::Welladorned Sita illumined the palace like the rising Sun lighting up the sky at dawn. 
2::39::18::Kausalya, Sita's motherinlaw, took her in her arms, embraced her, kissed her on the forehead, and said to her who conducted herself without evoking any pity.
2::39::19::Those women who, although always gratified, do not follow their husband when they fall into misfortune, are regarded as unfaithful.
2::39::20:: Though they have enjoyed all pleasures (with their husbands) earlier, they censure them in the wake of the slightest trouble or even abandon them. This is the nature of women.
2::39::21:: Evilminded young ladies are infidels. They are of perverted nature. They are inscrutable. In an instant they lose their love (for their husbands).
2::39::22:: Neither family traditions nor benefits received, nor education nor affection nor gifts nor even accumulated wealth attract women's hearts. Their minds are unstable indeed. 
2::39::23::But for those virtuous women whose minds are fixed in chastity, truth, scriptures and stability, the husband occupies a distinguished place and is considered supremely holy.
2::39::24::You must not underestimate my son in his exile. You must treat him as your god whether he is wealthy or not.
2::39::25:: Sita who understood the import of these words which were in conformity with dharma and artha, repiled to her motherinlaw facing her with folded palms:
2::39::26::I shall do exactly all that the venerable motherinlaw instructs me. I have heard it earlier and have fully understood as to how I should conduct myself towards my husband.
2::39::27:: My worshipful motherinlaw should not equate me with wicked people (women). I cannot swerve from the path of virtue like radiance which never leaves the Moon. 
2::39::28::A veena (lute) sans strings cannot be played. A chariot without wheels cannot move. Similarly, a woman without her husband finds no  happiness even though she has one hundred sons.
2::39::29:: While the happiness that the father, mother and son give is limited, a husband gives unlimited happiness. Which wife will not worship such a husband? 
2::39::30:: Instructed about my obligations by an eminent lady (her mother?), imbued with these ideals, how can I, O exalted one, underestimate him (my husband)? For a woman the husband is a god indeed
2::39::31:: Listening to the heartstirring words of Sita, Kausalya with her heart so pure burst instantaneously into tears of joy and grief.
2::39::32:: Most virtuous Rama approached his mother, that highly revered lady among all his mothers, and with folded hands said:
2::39::33::O mother, do not grieve. Look after my father. My stay in the forest will soon come to an end.
2::39::34:: Fourteen years will pass off like a night's sleep. You will see me come home safe and sound, surrounded by my friends. 
2::39::35::Speaking thus to his mother with highly polished words, he then turned his gaze at his other three hundred and fifty mothers.
2::39::36::To all the mothers who stood deeply distressed with grief the son of Dasaratha spoke with folded hands these words suffused with virtue: 
2::39::37::If I have been harsh towards you, on account of our living together or through ignorance may you forgive me. I (now) seek leave of you all.
2::39::38:: All the women with their senses afflicted by grief heard the virtuous and wellbalanced words of the scion of the Raghu race:
2::39::39:: While Rama said so, there arose a loud cry of the wives of the king like the cry of the female herons.
2::39::40::Dasaratha's palace which reverberated, like the rumblings of the cloud, with the sounds of drums and other musical instruments earlier, now immensely griefsticken and trapped in calamity, is filled with wailings and lamentations. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyninth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
