2::10::1::Perversely advised by the extremely sinful hunchback the queen (Kaikeyi) lay down on the ground like a kinnari struck as though by a poisonous arrow. 
2::10::2::The intelligent, beautiful lady (Kaikeyi), having correctly decided the strategy in her mind, slowly unfolded everything to Manthara. 
2::10::3::That beautiful wretch (Kaikeyi) impressed by the words of Manthara heaved deep, hot sighs like a female serpent and  thought for a while about the means of bringing happiness to herself.
2::10::4::Manthara, Kaikeyi's friend, too, driven by a strong desire to fulfil her resolve was highly pleased and on hearing the firm determination of Kaikeyi, felt as if the accomplishment of the objective was at hand.
2::10::5::Then Kaikeyi finally took a firm decision. With a soiled body and a frowning face she lay down on the floor.
2::10::6::Thereafter Kaikeyi flung away her multicoloured garlands along with her costly ornaments on to the ground.
2::10::7::All the garlands and ornaments she scattered adorned the floor like the stars (illumining) the sky. 
2::10::8::Tightly fastening her hair into a single braid and wearing soiled clothes, she lay down in the chamber of wrath in a lifeless state like a kinnari.
2::10::9::The king issued orders for Rama's installation ceremony, and taking leave of his close associates entered the palace.                        .
2::10::10::Aware of the fact that Rama's installation ceremony was known to everybody by then he who had subdued his senses entered the inner apartment to convey it to one worthy of such pleasant news. 
2::10::11::The illustrious king entered the excellent abode of Kaikeyi like the Moon entering the mouth of Rahu in a sky overcast with pale clouds. 
2::10::12::The maharaja entered the inner apartment of Kaikeyi's prosperous abode filled with parrots and peacocks, reverberating with cries of kraunchas and swans and sounds of musical instruments attended with hunchbacks and dwarfs decorated with champak and ashoka trees, bowers surrounded with creepers, picturegalleries, altars and sofas embellished with ivory, gold and silver. It was shining with pools and trees bearing flowers and fruits in all seasons. Various kinds of food, drinks and eatables were kept ready. With excellent decorations that abode of Kaikeyi resembled heaven. (But) the king did not see his beloved Kaikeyi in her best bed.
2::10::13::Charged with passion and seeking carnal pleasure, the king became dejected when he did not see his beloved wife. He enquired about her.
2::10::14::Never before had queen Kaikeyi missed his time of arrival. Nor had the king ever entered her empty apartment. 
2::10::15::Having entered her apartment, the king, unaware of that foolish Kaikeyi's selfish design enquired her whereabouts as usual.
2::10::16::Thereafter, the frightened doorkeeper with folded palms said O monarch the queen in a hot mood has rushed into the chamber of wrath.
2::10::17::Hearing the words of the doorkeeper, the melancholic king grieved all the more with his senses agitated and unstable.
2::10::18::The lord of the earth (Dasaratha) saw her (Kaikeyi) lying down on the floor of the chamber of wrath in an unbecoming manner and felt as if consumed by grief.
2::10::19::The guileless, old king beheld his youthful wife who was dearer to him than his own life, filled with deceitful  intentions. She looked like a severed creeper, like a goddess fallen down, like a 'Kinnari' thrown down on earth, like an 'apsarasa' slipped from heaven, like an illusion torn, like a female deer tied down.
2::10::20::Like a mighty sheelephant caressing her cow wounded with a poisoned arrow in the forest, he caressed her lovingly.
2::10::21::With a mind extremely terrified yet passionate, he caressed his lotuseyed wife with his hands, and said:
2::10::22::O auspicious queen, I do not know whether your anger is directed at me. I do not know the cause of your anger. By whom have you been offended or disrespected? Why are you lying in the dust? This is causing me great sorrow. 
2::10::23::While I am here favourably disposed towards you, why are you lying down on the floor like one possessed by an evil spirit? Why are you afflicting my mind?
2::10::24::O lovely one there are, to my best satisfaction, expert physicians in all branches (of medical science). They will restore your health. Tell me your ailment.
2::10::25:: On whom do you wish to bestow favour? Who has caused you displeasure? To whom should I grant favour now? To whom should I cause great displeasure?
2::10::26::O queen shed no tears. Drain not your health. Ask me, and I shall slay one who should not be slain or release one who should be slain. I shall make a poor man rich and a wealthy man poor. (Tell me who are such people).
2::10::27::My kins and I are under your control. I will make no effort to go even a little  against your wishes.
2::10::28::If you want to do anything even if it means sacrificing my life, I shall do it. Since you know my strength, it does not behove you to doubt me. I swear on my  merits. I will do whatever pleases you.
2::10::29::My authority on the land is extended till such places the wheel of any chariot rotates such as the regions in the east, SindhuSauvira areas, Saurashtra, Southern regions, Banga, Anga, Magadha states, Matsya kingdom and KasiKosala countries which are prosperous places.
2::10::30::There wealth and foodgrains, sheep and goats and many things are produced. O Kaikeyi, ask whichever of these you wish.
2::10::31::O lady why do you exert yourself? Arise, arise. O charming Kaikeyi, tell me the cause of your fear. I will dispel it just as the Sun dispels morning mists.
2::10::32::Thus spoken to, she (Kaikeyi) breathed a sigh of relief. Intending to tell him the unpleasant thing (which was in her mind), she began tormenting her husband all the more.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे दशमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends  the tenth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
