2::57::1::रामे Rama, दक्षिणकूलस्थे had reached the southern bank (of the river), गुह: Guha, सुमन्त्रेण सह with Sumantra, चिरम् for a long while, कथयित्वा after talking, सुदुःखार्तः tormented with anguish, स्वगृहम् his home, जगाम reached.
2::57::2::तेषाम् their, भरद्वाजाभिगमनम् arrival at the hermitage of Bharadwaja, प्रयागे at Prayaga, सहाऽसनम् stay with him, आगिरेः till that Chitrakuta mountain, गमनम् journey, तत्रस्थैः by the men waiting there, उपलक्षितम् has been observed.
2::57::3:: अथ after this, अनुज्ञातः having been permitted by Rama to leave, सुमन्त्रः Sumantra, हयोत्तमान् best of horses, योजयित्वा harnessing, गाढदुर्मनाः with a heavy heart, अयोध्यां नगरीमेव to the city of Ayodhya, प्रययौ set out. 
2::57::4:: सः that, सुगन्धीनि fragrant, वनानि forests, सरितः च rivers as well, सरांसि च lakes also, ग्रामाणि villages, नगराणि च towns also, पश्यन् seeing, शीघ्रम् swiftly, अतिययौ passed through them. 
2::57::5::सारथिः charioteer, तृतीये on the third, अहनि day, सायाह्न समये at dusk, निरानन्दाम् cheerless, अयोध्याम् Ayodhya, समनुप्राप्य having reached, ददर्श ह saw.
2::57::6::सः सुमन्त्रः that Sumantra, निश्शब्दाम् silent, शून्यामिव almost empty, दृष्ट्वा having seen, परमदुर्मनाः deeply dejected, शोकवेगसमाहतः afflicted with gushing tears, चिन्तयामास reflected. 
2::57::7::सगजाः with elephants, साऽश्वाः with horses, सजनाः with its people, सजनाधिपा with the king, पुरी city, रामसन्तापदुःखेन in the sorrow caused by Rama's suffering, शोकाग्निना by the fire of sorrow, दग्धा burnt.
2::57::8::इति in this way, चिन्तापरः absorbed in this thought, सूतः the charioteer, शीघ्रपातिभिः by the swiftrunning, वाजिभिः horses, नगरद्वारम् entrance to the city, आसाद्य having arrived, त्वरितः quickly, प्रविवेश ह entered.
2::57::9::अथ thereafter, अभियान्तम् moving towards, तम् that, सूतम् charioteer, सुमन्त्रम् Sumantra, रामः Rama, क्व where?, इति thus, पृच्छन्तः enquiring, नराः people, शतशः in hundreds, सहस्रशः in thousands, अभ्यद्रवन् poured towards him.
2::57::10::अहम् I, गङ्गायाम् river Ganga, राघवम् Rama, आपृच्छ्य having taken leave, धार्मिकेण by the  righteous, महात्मना great (Rama), अनुज्ञातः having been permitted, निवृत्तः अस्मि I have returned, तेषाम् to them, शशंस said.
2::57::11::ते they, तीर्णाः इति crossed the river, thus, विज्ञाय having come to know, जनाः people, बाष्पपूर्णमुखाः faces filled with tears, अहो Oh, धिक् O fie upon us, इति thus, निश्श्वस्य sighing, हा राम इति saying 'Alas Rama', चुक्रुशुः च cried aloud. 
2::57::12::ये all of us, इह here, राघवम् Rama, न पश्यामः unable to see, हताः स्म खलु indeed we are  lost (deprived), इति thus saying, बृन्दम् बृन्दम् in groups, तिष्ठताम् standing, तेषाम् their, वचः words, शुश्राव च also heard. 
2::57::13:: दानयज्ञविवाहेषु in acts of charity, sacrifices and weddings, महत्सु in great, समाजेषु च  assemblies also, अन्तरा in their midst, धार्मिकम् righteous, रामम् Rama, पुनः again, जातु ever, न द्रक्ष्यामः will not see.
2::57::14::अस्य जनस्य to these people, किम् what, समर्थम् is meaningful, किम् what, प्रियम् pleases, किम् what, सुखावहम् brings happiness, इति in this way, रामेण by Rama, नगरम् this city of Ayodhya, पितृवत् like father, परिपालितम् looked after.
2::57::15::वातायनगतानाम् looking through the windows, स्त्रीणाम् women's, अन्वन्तरापणम् in the stalls, रामशोकाभितप्तानाम् burning with sorrow due to Rama's exile, परिदेवनम् bewailings, शुश्राव heard.
2::57::16::सः सुमन्त्रः that Sumantra, पिहिताननः with his face muffled, राजमार्गमध्येन along the highway, राजा दशरथः king Dasaratha, यत्र where, तत् that, गृहम् house, उपययौ reached straight.
2::57::17::सः that, रथात् from the chariot, अवतीर्य alighting, शीघ्रम् quickly, राजवेश्म king's palace, प्रविश्य च having entered, महाजनसमाकुलाः overcrowded with people, सप्त seven, कक्ष्याः courtyards, अभिक्राम crossed.
2::57::18::अथ thereafter, नार्यः women, हर्म्यैः from mansions, विमानैः from sevenstoried buildings, प्रासादैः from royal palaces, समागतम् arrived, आवेक्ष्य having seen, रामदर्शन कर्शिताः sad at not seeing Rama, हाहाकारकृताः cried out 'Alas, Alas'.
2::57::19::स्त्रियः women, आर्ततराः in greater anguish,आयतैः large,विमलैःclean, अश्रुवेगपरिप्लुतैः flooded with the force of tears, नेत्रैः with eyes, अव्यक्तम् silently  अन्योन्यम् one another, अभिवीक्षन्ते were looking.
2::57::20::ततः then, ततस्ततः here and there, प्रासाद्येभ्यः from palaces, रामशोकाभितप्तानाम् afflicted with sorrow due to Rama's exile, दशरथस्त्रीणाम् of the wives of Dasaratha, मन्दम् जल्पितम् whispers, शुश्राव heard.
2::57::21::रामेण सह with Rama, निर्यातः went out, विना रामम् without Rama, इह here, आगतः returned, सूतः charioteer, शोचन्तीम् worrying, कौशल्याम् Kausalya, किं नाम what can, प्रतिवक्ष्यति will he say?
2::57::22::पुत्रे when the son, आच्छिद्य severing all connections, निर्याते had set out, कौसल्या Kausalya, यथा in whichever way, यत्र जीवति wherever surviving still, दुर्जीवम् it is difficult to live, मन्ये I consider, एवम् like this, सुकरम् easily, न not, ध्रुवम् certain.
2::57::23::राज्ञ: king's, स्त्रीणाम् wives, सत्यरूपम् truth embodied, तत् वाक्यम् that word, निशामयन्  listening, सहसा immediately, शोकेन with grief, प्रदीप्तमिव as if burning, गृहम् house, विवेश entered.
2::57::24::सः he (Sumantra), अष्टमीम् eighth, कक्ष्याम् courtyard, प्रविश्य having entered, पाण्डुरे in pale white, गृहे chamber, दीनम् desolate, आतुरम् anguished, पुत्रशोकपरिम्लानम् withered by sorrow over his son, राजानम् king, अपश्यत् saw.
2::57::25::सुमन्त्रः Sumantra, असीनम् seated, नरेन्द्रम् king, अभिगम्य having approached, अभिवाद्य paying  obeisance, रामवचनम् Rama's words, यदोक्तम् verbatim, प्रत्यवेदयत् conveyed.
2::57::26::सः that, राजा king, तूष्णीमेव silently, तत् those words, श्रुत्वा having listened, विभ्रान्तचेतनः  with a bewildered mind, रामशोकाभिपीडितः tormented by the grief due to Rama's absence, मूर्छितः with senses lost, भूमौ on the ground, न्यपतत् fell.
2::57::27::ततः then, पृथिवीपतौ when lord of the earth (the king), मूर्छिते had fallen unconscious, अन्तःपुरम्  inner apartment, आविद्धम् broken down, नृपतौ king, क्षितौ on the ground, पतिते had fallen, बाहू arms, उद्धृत्य having raised, चुक्रोश cried loudly. 
2::57::28::तदा then, सुमित्रया सहिता together with Sumitra, कौशल्या Kausalya, पतितम् fallen on the ground, पतिम् husband, उत्थापयामास lifted him up, इदम् these, वचनम् words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::57::29::महाभाग O distinguished one, वनवासात् from the forest, अनुप्राप्तम् returned, दुष्करकारिणः one who had accomplished arduous tasks, तस्य Rama's, इमम् this, दूतम् messenger, कस्मात् why, न प्रतिभाषसे are not talking.
2::57::30::राघव O descendant of the Raghus, अनयम् injustice, कृत्वा having done, अद्य now, एवम् in this way, व्यपत्रपसि are feeling ashamed, उत्तिष्ठ rise, ते to you, सुकृतम् the merit (of having fullfilled your word), अस्तु obtained, शोके in this sorrow, सहायता help, न स्यात् will not get.
2::57::31::देव O king, यस्याः by whose, भयात् from fear, सारथिम् charioteer, रामम् about Rama, नानुपृच्छसि you are not enquiring, कैकेयी Kaikeyi, इह now, न तिष्ठति not here, विस्रब्धम् without fear, प्रतिभाष्यताम् you may speak.
2::57::32::बाष्पविप्लुतभाषिणी speaking with a voice choked with tears, शोकलालसा absorbed in grief, सा कौशल्या that Kausalya, महाराजम् to the maharaja, तथा that way, उक्त्वा having said, आशु suddenly, धरण्याम् on the ground, निपपात fell down.
2::57::33::सर्वाः all, ताः स्त्रियः those women, एवम् thus, विलपतीम् lamenting, भुवि पतिताम्  fallen on the ground, कौशल्याम् Kausalya, दृष्ट्वा having seen, पतिं च also their husband, अवेक्ष्य having seen, सुस्वरम् in chorus, रुरुदुः wailed loudlly.
2::57::34::ततः thereafter, उत्थितम् rising, तम् that, अन्तःपुरनादम् sound from the inner apartment, समीक्षय having seen, वृद्धा: old, तरुणाश्च young, मानवाः people, सर्वाः all, स्त्रीयश्च also women, समन्ततः all around, रुरुदुः lamented, तदा then, पुरम् city, पुनरेव again, सङ्कुलम् आसीत् was filled (with people).
