2::16::1::पुराणवित् conversant with ancient traditions, सः he (Sumantra), जनाकुलं तद् crowded with people, अन्तःपुरद्वारम् the door of the inner apartment, समतीत्य having passed through, ततः after that, प्रासकार्मुकबिभ्रद्भिः carrying spears and bows, मृष्टकुंडलैः wearing shining ear rings, अप्रमादिभिः alert, एकाग्रैः attentive, स्वनुरक्तै: with utmost devotion (to the king), युवभिः by young men, अधिष्ठिताम् guarding, प्रविविक्ताम् sparsely crowded, कक्ष्याम् courtyard, आससाद reached.
2::16::2::पुराणवित् conversant with ancient traditions, सः he (Sumantra), जनाकुलं तद् crowded with people, अन्तःपुरद्वारम् the door of the inner apartment, समतीत्य having passed through, ततः after that, प्रासकार्मुकबिभ्रद्भिः carrying spears and bows, मृष्टकुंडलैः wearing shining ear rings, अप्रमादिभिः alert, एकाग्रैः attentive, स्वनुरक्तै: with utmost devotion (to the king), युवभिः by young men, अधिष्ठिताम् guarding, प्रविविक्ताम् sparsely crowded, कक्ष्याम् courtyard, आससाद reached.
2::16::3::तत्र there, काषायिणः wearing orange robes, वृद्धान् the aged, वेत्रपाणीन् canes in hands, स्वलङ्कृतान् wellornamented, सुसमाहितान् with utmost concentation, द्वारि at the entrance, विष्ठितान् appointed, स्त्र्यध्यक्षान् security staff for women's apartments, ददर्श saw.
2::16::4::रामप्रियचिकीर्षवः wishing the welfare of Rama, ते सर्वे all of them, समायान्तम् arriving, समीक्ष्य having seen, ससंभ्रमाः in great haste, सहसा quickly, आसनेभ्यः from their seats, उत्पतिताः rose.
2::16::5::विनीतात्मा humble, सूतपुत्रः to charioteer, प्रदक्षिणः extremely courteous, तान् to them, उवाच said, सुमन्त्र: Sumantra, द्वारि at the entrance, तिष्ठति is waiting, क्षिप्रं at once, रामाय to Rama, आख्यात inform
2::16::6::भर्तुः of the master, प्रियचिकीर्षवः desirous of doing good, ते they, रामम् Rama, उपसङ्गम्य having approached, क्षिप्रमेव speedily, सहभार्याय in the company of his wife, रामाय to Rama, आभिचक्षिरे informed.
2::16::7::राघवः scion of the Raghus (Rama), पितुः of his father, अभ्यन्तरम् intimate, प्रतिवेदितम् informed by them, सूतम् to the charioteer, आज्ञाय having come to know, प्रियकाम्यया  desirous of pleasing, तत्रैव to that place only, आनाययामास was brought in.
2::16::8::वैश्रवणसङ्काशम् resembling Kubera (god of wealth), स्वलङ्कृतं richlycovered, वराहरुधिराभेण red as the blood of a hog, शुचिना of pure, सुगन्धिना with sweet fragrance, परार्ध्येन excellent,  चन्दनेन with sandalpaste, अनुलिप्तम् anointed, परन्तपम् subduer of enemies, चित्रया (united) with star Chitra, शशिनं यथा like the Moon, पार्श्वतः by the side of, स्थितया standing,  वालव्यजनहस्तया a fan of yak's tail in hand, सीतया चापि Sita also, उपेतम् was present, सोत्तरच्छदे richly covered, सौवर्णे golden, पर्यङ्के in the couch, उपविष्टम् sitting, तम् to him (Rama), सूतः charioteer (Sumantra), ददर्श beheld.
2::16::9::विनयज्ञः one who knows the art of modesty, वन्दी panegyrist (Sumantra), विनीतवत् with humility, स्वतेजसा with his own effulgence, उपपन्नम् secured, तपन्तम् shining, आदित्यम् इव like the Sun, वरदम् conferor of boons, तम् that Rama, ववन्दे made reverential salutation.
2::16::10::राजसत्कृतः honoured by the king (Dasaratha), सुमन्त्रः Sumantra, विहारशयनासने on a couch , सुमुखम् charming countenance, राजपुत्रम् prince, दृष्ट्वा having seen, प्राञ्जलिः with folded palms, इदम् these words, उवाच said.
2::16::11::कौशल्यासुप्रजाः worthy son of Kausalya, रामः O Rama, महिष्या queen, कैकेय्या सह along with Kaikeyi, पिता father, त्वाम् you, द्रष्टुम् to see, इच्छति wishes, तत्र there, गम्यताम् you may go, मा चिरम् do not delay.
2::16::12::ततः after that, एवम् thus, उक्तः spoken, महाद्युतिः of great lustre, नरसिंहः lion among men,  संहृष्टः was immensely pleased, सम्मानयामास honoured him, सीताम् to Sita, इदम् these words, उवाच ह also spoke.
2::16::13::देवि O devi (Sita), देवश्च the king, देवी च also queen, समागम्य having met together, मदन्तरे about me, अभिषेचनसंहितम् relating to the consecration, किञ्चित् something, मन्त्रयेते are consulting, ध्रुवम् is certain.
2::16::14::असितेक्षणा darkeyed, सुदक्षिणा highly favoured, प्रियकामा desiring the welfare (of the king), अभिप्रायम् intention, लक्षयित्वा having perceived, राजानम् to the king, मदर्थम् for my purpose, सञ्चोदयति is urging.
2::16::15::केकयाधिपतेः सुता daughter of  the king of Kekaya (Kaikeyi), जननी च my mother also, सा she, प्रहृष्टा being extremely happy, हितकामा desirous of (my) benefit, महाराजम् to the king, अनुवर्तिनी following, मे my, अर्थकामा seeks my wellbeing.
2::16::16::महिष्या the queen, प्रियया सह with his dear wife, महाराजः king, दिष्ट्या fortunately, सुमन्त्रम् Sumantra, दूतम् as messenger, मम my, अर्थकामकरम् accomplishing artha and kama, प्राहिणोत् has sent.
2::16::17::तत्र there, यादृशी of which sort, परिषत्  council, तादृशः like that, दूतः messenger, आगतः has  arrived, ध्रुवम् assuredly, अद्यैव this very day, राजा king, माम् me, यौवराज्ये as heirapparent, अभिषेक्ष्यति will consecrate.
2::16::18::हन्त what a joy, इतः from here, शीघ्रं immediately, गत्वा having gone, महीपतिम् to the king, द्रक्ष्यामि च shall see, त्वम् you, परिवारेण सह along with attendants, सुखम् happily, आस्व remain, रमस्व च rejoice.
2::16::19::पतिसम्मानिता highly esteemed by her husband, असितेक्षणा having dark eyes, सीता Sita, मङ्गलानि auspicious events, अभिदध्युषी reflecting, भर्तारम् husband, आद्वारम् up to the entrance, अनुवव्राज followed.
2::16::20::राजा the king (Dasaratha), द्विजातिभिः by brahmins, जुष्टं resorted to, राजसूयाभिषेचनम् 'Rajasuya'  sacrifice at the time of consecration, राज्यम् kingdom, ते you, लोककृत् the creater of the world (lord Brahma), वासवस्येव like Indra, कर्तुम् to bestow, अर्हति deserves.
2::16::21::दीक्षितम् having been initiated, व्रतसम्पन्नम् engaged in the observance of the vows, वराजिनधरम् wearing excellent deerskin, शुचिम् pure, कुरङ्गशृङ्गपाणिं च carrying the horns of an antelope in your hand, त्वाम् you, पश्यन्ती looking, अहम् I, भजामि adore.
2::16::22::ते your, पूर्वां दिशम् in the east, वज्रधरः the wielder of thunder (Indra), दक्षिणाम् in the south, यमः Yama, पश्चिमामाशाम् in the west, वरुणः Varuna, उत्तरां दिशं तु in the north, धनेशः Kubera, पातु may protect you.
2::16::23::अथ thereafter, कृतकौतुकमङ्गलः wearing auspicious ornaments, रामः Rama, सीताम् Sita, अनुज्ञाप्य taking leave of, सुमन्त्रेण सह along with Sumantra, निवेशनात् from his palace, निश्चक्राम departed.
2::16::24::सः he, गिरिगुहाशयः resting in a mountain cave, सिंहः lion, पर्वतात् इव like from a mountain, निष्क्रम्य having come out of his palace, द्वारि at the entrance, स्थितम् standing, प्रह्वाञ्जलिपुटम् bowing with folded hands, लक्ष्मणम् Lakshmana, अपश्यत् saw.
2::16::25::अथ after that, पुरुषव्याघ्रः tiger among men, सः he, राजनन्दनः son of the king (Rama), मध्यमकक्ष्यायां in the middle courtyard, सुहृज्जनैः with friends, समागच्छत् met, सर्वान् अर्थिनः all of them eager to see him, दृष्ट्वा having seen, समेत्य having met, प्रतिनन्द्य च having greeted them, पावकसङ्काशम् resembling fire, वैयाघ्रम् covered with tigerskin, राजतम् made of silver, रथोत्तमम् best of chariots, आरुरोह mounted.
2::16::26::श्रिया with splendour, ज्वलितः dazzling, राघवः descendant of the Raghu race (Rama), मेघनादम् sound of cloud (thunder), असम्बाधम् spacious, मणिहेमविभूषितं decorated with gold and gems, प्रभया with brilliance, चक्षूंषि eyes, मुष्णन्तमिव dazzling, सूर्यवर्चसं lusture of the Sun,  करेणुशिशुकल्पै: looking like young elephants, परमवाजिभिः with excellent horses, युक्तम् harnessed, आशुगम् swiftmoving, रथम् chariot, सहस्राक्षः thousandeyed, इन्द्रः Indra, हरियुक्तम् इव harnessed by horses (of Indra), आस्थाय mounted, तूर्णम् swiftly, प्रययौ went.
2::16::27::आकाशे in the sky, पर्जन्य इव like stormcloud, स्वनवान् sonorous, श्रीमान् magnificent, सः he (that chariot), अभिनादयन् making sound, महाभ्रात् from a huge cloud, चन्द्रमा इव like moon, निकेतात् from the residence, निर्ययौ departed.
2::16::28::राघवानुजः Rama's younger brother, भ्राता brother, लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, छत्रचामरपाणिः holding an umbrella and a fan made of yak's tail in his hand, पृष्ठतः at the rear, रथम् the chariot, आस्थाय having mounted, भ्रातरम् brother, जुगोप guarded.
2::16::29::ततः then, समन्ततः  all around, निष्क्रममाणस्य departing, तस्य that (chariot's), जनौघस्य of the multitude of people, तुमुलः tumultuous, हलहलाशब्दः roaring sound, समजायत emanated.
2::16::30::ततः afterwards, मुख्याः chiefs, हयवराः excellent horses, गिरिसन्निभाः resembling hills in size, नागाश्च elephants, शतशः in hundreds, सहस्रशः in thousands, तदा then, रामम् Rama, अनुजग्मुः followed.
2::16::31::सन्नद्धाः equipped with armour, चन्दनागरुभूषिताः anointing their bodies with sandalpaste and agaru, खड्गचापधराः holding swords and bows, आशंसवः heralds, शूराः जनाः soldiers, अस्य Rama's, अग्रतः ahead of him, जग्मुः followed.
2::16::32::ततः afterwards, तदा then, पथि on the way, वादित्रशब्दाश्च sounds of musical instruments, वन्दिनाम् of panegyrists, स्तुतिशब्दाश्च songs of eulogy, शूराणाम् warriors', सिंहनादाश्च roarings, शुश्रुविरे were heard.
2::16::33::अरिन्दमः subduer of enemies, हर्म्यवातायनस्थाभिः standing at the windows of their mansions भूषिताभिः wellattired, स्त्रीभिः by women, समन्ततः from every side, सुपुष्पौघै: with heaps of flowers, कीर्यमाणः being showered, ययौ proceeded.
2::16::34::ततः thereafter, हर्म्यस्थाः standing on the top of the houses, क्षितिस्थाश्च standing on the ground also, सर्वानवद्याङ्ग्य: women of faultless limbs, रामपिप्रीषया to propitiate Rama, अग्य्रैः charming, वचोभिः with words, रामं to Rama, ववन्दिरे paid homage.
2::16::35::मातृनन्दन O Joy of your mother, (Rama), सिद्धयात्रं whose journey has become fruitful, पित्र्यं राज्यम् the father's kingdom, उपस्थितम् secured, त्वाम् you, पश्यन्ती seeing, ते your, माता mother, कौशल्या Kausalya, नूनम् surely, नन्दति will be delighted.
2::16::36::ताः those, नार्यः women, रामस्य Rama's, हृदयप्रियाम् dear to the heart, सीताम् to Sita, सर्वसीमन्तिनीभ्य: more than all women, वराम् the best, सीमन्तिनीम् as lady, अमन्यन्त हि  considered.
2::16::37::तया that Sita, शशाङ्केन with the Moon, रोहिणी इव like Rohini, रामसंयोगम् union with Rama, आप got, या such, देव्या by (Sita) devi, पुरा in the past, नूनम् assuredly, महत् great, तपः austerities, सुचरितम् peformed.
2::16::38::राजमार्गस्थः along the highway, नरोत्तमः best among men, (Rama), इति thus, प्रासादशृङ्गेषु standing on the top of their buildings, प्रमदाभिः by women, उदाहृता: uttered, प्रियाः वाचः pleasing words, शुश्राव heard, आत्मसंपूजनै their admiration of himself श्रुण्वन् having heard ययौ proceeded रामः Rama महापथम् the highway
2::16::39::तदा then, सः that, राघवः Rama, तत्र there, समागतस्य having assembled, लोकस्य people's, कथा प्रपञ्चान् words of praise, शुश्राव heard, प्रहृष्टरूपस्य great rejoicings, पुरोजनस्य citizens, आत्माधिकाराः concerning himself, विविधाः different, वाचः च words (heard).
2::16::40::राजप्रसादात् by the king's grace, विपुलाम् the earth, गमिष्यन् attaining, एषः this, राघवः scion of the Raghus (Rama), अद्य today, श्रियम् wealth, गच्छति is to acquire, येषाम् who, नः for us, अयम् this, प्रशास्ता protector, भविता will become, एते वयम् all of us, सर्वसमृद्धकामाः all our desires will be gratified.
2::16::41::एषः this (Rama), यत् if, सर्वम् entire, इदं राष्ट्रम् this kingdom, चिराय for a long time, प्रपत्स्यते obtains, अस्य जनस्य for these people, लाभः benefit, अस्मिन् this Rama, मनुजाधिपे king, कश्चित् none, जातु never, अप्रियम् unpleasant, किञ्चन even a little, न पश्येत् हि will not see, दुःखम् sorrow, न will not see.
2::16::42::सः he (Rama), घोषवद्भिः with sounds, मतङ्गजै: with intoxicated elephants, हयैः with horses, पुरस्सरैः preceding, स्वस्तिकसूतमागधैः invocation of blessings by bards, महीयमानः greatly honoured, प्रवरैः वादकैः by best musical performers, अभिष्टुतः being praised, वैश्रवणो यथा like Kubera, ययौ went.
2::16::43::रामः Rama, करेणुमातङ्गरथाश्वसंकुलम् thronged with female elephants, elephants, horses and chariots, महाजनौघ: great multitude of people, परिपूर्णचत्वरम् filled at the intesection of  highways, प्रभूतरत्नम् with many gems, बहुपण्यसंचयम् sufficient merchandise (for sale), रुचिरं beautiful, महापथम् highway, ददर्श saw.
