2::6::1::With the family priest (Vasistha) gone, Rama had his bath, and with his mind under control came to Lord Narayana along with his largeeyed consort, Sita. (with an intention to worship him)
2::6::2::Then holding the vessel containing havis on his head, he offered the oblations of  clarified butter into the sacred fire for Visnu in accordance with ritual practices.
2::6::3::The son of the king (Rama) partook the remainder of the havis seeking his own welfare. With a restrained mind and a vow of silence, he meditated upon Lord Narayana and slept along with Vaidehi on a wellspread bed of kusha grass in the auspicious temple of lord Visnu.
2::6::4::He got up (Rama) with one yama (three hours) of the night still left, and had his entire  residence decorated. 
2::6::5::Then (in the last watch of the night) hearing the pleasant words of bards and panegyrists he attended to early morning rites and intoned Gayatri with a concentrated mind.
2::6::6:: Clad in spotless silk garments, he extoled Lord Madhusudana (Visnu) with his head bowed low. He listened to the purificatory mantras recited by brahmins.
2::6::7::And then the deep and sweet proclamations of 'This is an auspicious day' mingled with the sounds of trumpets reverberated (the city of) Ayodhya.
2::6::8::The residents of Ayodhya were happy to hear that the scion of the Raghus (Rama) along with princess of Videha (Sita) had undertaken the fast.
2::6::9::Having heard about the coronation of Rama, all the citizens began to decorate the city soon after daybreak. 
2::6::10:: Banners of varying colours and flags were raised on the temples looking resplendent like peaks wreathed by a mass of white clouds, at the crossroads, on the thoroughfares, on the trees standing on avenues, on the towers and stalls of the merchants abounding in various kinds of merchandise, on prosperous and graceful houses of householders, in all public halls and on trees looking tall from a distance.
2::6::11::Troupes of actors and dancers entertained the people with songs pleasing to the mind and ears and their utterances were heard here and there. 
2::6::12::As the time for Rama's coronation was approaching, men in public squares and in private houses talked with one another about the consecration of Rama.
2::6::13::Similarly children playing in groups in front of the houses also related to each other  stories regarding the coronation of Rama.
2::6::14::On the occasion of Rama's coronation the highway, strewn with flowers and rendered fragrant with the burning of incense by the citizens looked glorious. 
2::6::15::In the same way lest night should fall (by the time the installation ceremony was completed), the streets were provided with lamps in the shape of trees to light them up. 
2::6::16::Thus the residents of Ayodhya decorated the city and eagerly waited for Rama's cornonation as heirapparent. Gathered in groups at public squares and in the assembly halls they conversed among themselves about the event, praising Dasaratha, the lord among men.
2::6::17::Oh having realised that he himself has grown old the highsouled king Dasaratha the veritable delight to the Ikshvaku race,  is going to coronate Rama in the kingdom. 
2::6::18:: All of us are fortunate indeed that Rama who knows the world's high and low shall be our king, protector for a long time.
2::6::19::This scion of the Raghus (Rama) is free from arrogance, is learned, righteous and affectionate towards his brothers as much as towards us.
2::6::20:: May the virtuous and sinless king Dasaratha live long by whose grace we are beholding (going to behold) Rama's coronation. 
2::6::21::Having heard about the coronation of Rama, villagers arrived from all directions and listened to the citizens conversing in this manner.
2::6::22::The city was filled with villagers coming from different directions to behold Rama's coronation.
2::6::23::The multitudes of men moving to and fro gave rise to a noise like the roar of the ocean enhanced by the violent speed (of the wind) on the full and new moon days.
2::6::24::The city (of Ayodhya), resembling the abode of Indra, (Amaravati) crowded with villagers from all over wishing to witness it (the coronation of Rama), grew noisy and sparkled like the water of the ocean teeming with aquatic animals.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षष्ठस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
