2::104::1::भ्रात्रा brother, लक्ष्मणेन सह along with Lakshmana, रामः Rama, गुरुवत्सलम् to one devoted to elders, भ्रातरम् to brother, तम् that Bharata, समाश्वास्य having consoled, प्रष्टुम् to question,  समुपचक्रमे commenced. 
2::104::2::त्वम् you, चीरजटाजिन: wearing barkrobes, matted locks and antelope skin, यस्मात् for what reason, इमं देशम् to this region, आगतः have come, एतत् किम् what is it, त्वया by you, प्रव्याहृतम् being related, अहम् I, श्रोतुम् to hear, इच्छेयम् I desire. 
2::104::3::त्वम् you, राज्यम् kingdom, हित्वा leaving, कृष्णाजिनजटाधरः wearing deer skin and matted hair, किन्निमित्तम् for what reason, इमं देशम् this region, प्रविष्टः have entered, तत् that, सर्वम् everything, वक्तुम् to tell, अर्हसि behoves you. 
2::104::4::महात्मना by the magnanimous, काकुत्स्थेन by Rama, इति thus, उक्तः uttered, कैकयीपुत्रः son of Kaikeyi, Bharata, प्राञ्जलिः joining the palms in reverence, भूयः again, बलवत् strongly, प्रगृह्य holding, वाक्यम् this statement, अब्रवीत् said. 
2::104::5::महाबाहुः mightyarmed, तातः father, आर्यं my esteemed brother, परित्यज्य having abandoned, सुदुष्करम् impossible to perform, कर्म task, कृत्वा having done, पुत्रशोकाभिपीडितः tortured by the grief due to separation from his son, स्वर्गम् heaven, गतः went. 
2::104::6::परन्तप O tormentor of enemies, Rama, मम my, मात्रा mother, स्त्रिया woman, कैकेय्या by Kaikeyi, नियुक्तः instigated, आत्मयशोहरम् destroying his reputation, सुमहत् great, इदं पापम् this sin, चकार commited.
2::104::7::मम my, जननी mother, सा that lady, राज्यफलम् fruit of kingodm, अप्राप्य without acquiring, विधवा widow, शोककर्शिता formented with grief, महाघोरे dreadful, निरये hell, पतिष्यति will fall.
2::104::8::तस्य such, दासभूतस्य servant I am, मे to me, प्रसादम् favour, कर्तुम् to do, अर्हसि behoves you, अद्येव now itself, मघवानिव like Indra, राज्येन in the kingdom, अभिषिञ्चस्व be coronated. 
2::104::9::इमाः these, सर्वाः all, प्रकृतयः subjects, विधवाः widows, मातरश्च those mothers, त्वत्सकाशम्   to your proximity, अनुप्राप्ताः have reached, प्रसादम् favour, कर्तुम् to do, अर्हसि behoves you. 
2::104::10::मानद O bestower of honour, तत् for that reason, आनुपूर्व्या by succession, युक्तम् appropriate, आत्मनि in you, युक्तं च is appropriate, राज्यम् kingdom, धर्मेण righteously, प्राप्नुहि you may obtain, सुहृदः friends, सकामान् having fulfilled their desire, कुरु make them.
2::104::11::समग्रा this entire, भूमिः earth, शारदी relating to autumn, रजनी यथा like night, पतिना as lord, त्वया by you, विमलेन by the immaculate, शशिना इव like the Moon, अविधवा भवतु let it be a widow no more. 
2::104::12::एभिः by these, सचिवैः सार्धम् with ministers, मया by me, शिरसा with head bowed down, याचितः has been besought, भ्रातुः of a brother, शिष्यस्य of a disciple, दासस्य of a slave, प्रसादम् favour, कर्तुम् to do, अर्हसि it behoves you.
2::104::13::पुरुषव्याघ्रः O best among men, तत् for that reason, शाश्वतम् eternal, पित्र्यम् hereditary, पूजितम् venerable, सर्वम् entire, इदम् this order, प्रकृतिमण्डलम् the whole order of subjects, अतिक्रमितुम् to transgress, न अर्हति it does not behove you. 
2::104::14::महाबाहुः mightyarmed, कैकयीसुतः Kaikeyi's son, Bharata, एवम् in this way, उक्त्वा having said, सबाष्पः with tearful eyes, रामस्य Rama's, पादौ feet, पुनः again, विधिवत् in accordance with tradition, शिरसा with his head, जग्राह grasped.
2::104::15::रामः Rama, पुनः पुनः repeatedly, निःश्वसन्तम् heaving sighs, मत्तम् in rut, मातङ्गम् इव  resembling an elephant, भ्रातरम् brother, तं भरतम् that Bharata, परिष्वज्य embracing, इदम् this word, अब्रवीत् said. 
2::104::16::कुलीनः a man of noble birth, सत्वसम्पन्नः endowed with energy, तेजस्वी powerful, चरितव्रतः adherent to one's vows, त्वद्विधः like you, जनः a man, राज्यहेतोः for the sake of kingdom, पापम् sin, कथम् how, आचरेत् will commit? 
2::104::17::अरिसूदन O destroyer of enemies, त्वयि in you, सूक्ष्ममपि slightest, दोषम् fault, न पश्यामि I do not find, त्वम् you, बाल्यात् out of childishness, जननीं your mother, विगर्हितुम् to reproach, नार्हसि चापि does not behove you.
2::104::18::महाप्राज्ञ sagacious, अनघ sinless, गुरूणाम् of elders, उपपन्नेषु when married, दारेषु in relation to their wives, पुत्रेषु च also sons, सर्वदा always, कामकारः acting at will, विधीयते is laid down.
2::104::19::सौम्य O handsome one, लोके in this world, भार्याः wives, पुत्राश्च sons, शिष्याश्च disciples, साधुभिः by virtuous men, यथा as, संख्याताः have been treated, वयम् we, अस्य for this (king Dasaratha, etc), त्वं you, अनुज्ञातुं to permit, अर्हसि it behoves you.
2::104::20::सौम्य O handsome one, चीरवसनम् dressed in bark robes, कृष्णाजिनाम्बरम् with antelope skin as garment, माम् me, महाराजः the maharaja (Dasaratha), वने वा either in the forest, राज्ये वापि or in the kingdom, वासयितुम् to accommodate me,  ईश्वरः is competent. 
2::104::21::धर्मभृताम् among the protectors of righteousness, श्रेष्ठ best, धर्मज्ञे conversant with the ways of righteousness, पितरि in father, लोकसत्कृतम् revered by the world, यावत् how much, गौरवम् honour, जनन्यामपि even for mother, तावत् that much, गौरवम् honour, should be shown. 
2::104::22::राघव O Bharata, धर्मशीलाभ्याम् of righteous conduct, एताभ्याम् by these two, मातापितृभ्याम् by the father and mother, वनम् to forest, गच्छ go, इति thus, उक्तः having been told, अहम् I, अन्यत् other than this, कथम् how, समाचरेत् can act?
2::104::23::त्वया by you, अयोध्यायाम् in Ayodhya, लोकसत्कृतम् honoured by the the world, राज्यम् kingdom, प्राप्तव्यम् is to be obtained, मया by me, वल्कलवाससा with barkrobes as garments, दण्डकारण्ये in Dandaka forest, वस्तव्यम् I must live. 
2::104::24::महाराजः great king, महातेजाः of great splendour, दशरथः Dasaratha, लोकसन्निधौ in the presence of people, एवम् in this way, विभागम् apportionment, कृत्वा having  made, व्यादिश्य च having commanded, दिवम् to heaven, गतः went.
2::104::25::धर्मात्मा righteous, लोकगुरुः revered by the world, सः राजा that king, तव your, प्रमाणम्  proclamation, त्वम् you, पित्रा by father, दत्तम् bestowed, यथाभागम् that portion, उपभोक्तुम् to enjoy, अर्हसि behoves you. 
2::104::26::सौम्य O handsome one, अहं तु as for myself, चतुर्दश fourteen, समाः years, दण्डकारण्यम् Dandaka forest, आश्रितः taking refuge, महात्मना magnanimous, पित्रा by father, दत्तम् bestowed, भागम् portion, उपभोक्ष्ये I will enjoy.
2::104::27:: नरलोकसत्कृतः honoured by the men of the world, पिता father, महात्मा highsouled, विबुधाधिपोपमः equal to the king of the gods, यत् whatever, अब्रवीत् said, माम् to me, तदेव that only, परमात्मन: the ulitimate, हितं good, मन्ये I regard it, सर्वलोकेश्वर: the will of the lord of all the worlds, भावमप्ययम् न should not be allowed to vanish.
