2::83::1::Getting up at dawn, Bharata boarded his excellent chariot and set forth swiftly, longing to see Rama. 
2::83::2:: All the ministers and priests went ahead of Bharata mounting their chariots,  harnessed with horses and resembling the chariot of the Sun god.
2::83::3::As per tradition, nine thousand elephants were arranged to follow Bharata, delight of the race of the Ikshvakus as he set out.
2::83::4::Sixty thousands chariots and many archers holding weapons of every kind followed the illustrious prince Bharata as he went.   
2::83::5::One hundred thousand horses each mounted by a rider followed Bharata, one who had conquered  his passion and adhered to truth.
2::83::6::Kaikeyi, Sumitra as well as the illustrious Kausalya travelled by a resplendent chariot, delighted with the thought of bringing Rama back.
2::83::7::Venerable people in groups, narrating various accomplishments of Rama and eager to see him with Lakshmana, proceeded in a delightful mood.
2::83::8::When shall we see that mightyarmed Rama of darkblue complexion like the raincloud, firm in strength and steadfast in vows and the destroyer of the sorrows of  this world?
2::83::9:: At his sight alone our sorrows will be dispelled, the way the darkness of the entire world is dispelled by the rising Sun. 
2::83::10::The inhabitants of the town proceeded joyfully, narrating Rama's delightful achievements on their way by embracing one another.
2::83::11::Respectable city folks, like traders and other subjects went along in great delight towards Rama.
2::83::12::Gempolishers, potters, weaponsmiths, weavers, makers of adornments with peacock feathers, sawyers, makers of artificial ornaments, perforators of shells and ornaments, ivoryworkers, whitewashers, purveyors of fragrant essences, renowned goldsmiths, blanketcleaners, hotbath attendants, physicians, vintners, incense merchants, washermen, tailors, headmen of villages and hamlets, actors along with their wives, fishermen -- all followed Bharata.
2::83::13::Brahmins learned in the Vedas and renowned for their virtuous conduct followed Bharta in their thousands on bullock carts with composed minds.
2::83::14::Dressed well in clean clothes and anointed with pure red sandalpaste, they all slowly followed Bharata, mounting on various vehicles.
2::83::15::The army, overwhelmed with joy and cheer followed the devoted brother Bharata who had set out to bring back Rama. 
2::83::16::After travelling a long distance on chariots, carriages, horses and elephants, they reached the river Ganga close to Srngiberapura, a country ruled vigilantly by Rama's friend, the valiant Guha who lived there along with his relatives.
2::83::17::The army following Bharata reached the bank of the river Ganga, graced by chakravakas (ruddy geese) and halted there.
2::83::18::As he beheld the army following him and the river Ganga of sacred waters in front of him, Bharata who was proficient in speech said to his ministers:
2::83::19:: You may, according to your convenience, halt the army anywhere here and, after taking rest (for the night), we shall cross the river Ganga tomorrow.
2::83::20::Meanwhile, I shall get into this river and offer libations with water to the departed king for the good of his life in the other world.
2::83::21::While he (Bharata's) was speaking this way, all the ministers assented by saying 'Be it so' and made arrangement for their troops to rest separately according to their pleasure.
2::83::22::The army encamped by Bharata looked splendid with royal insigaia. After making necessary arrangements for the army on the bank of the mighty river Ganga and pondering over the means of bringing back the magnanimous Rama, Bharata stayed.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्र्यशीतितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eightythird sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
