2::69::1:: On the very night the messengers were entering the city, Bharata had a distressing dream.
2::69::2:: The son of the king of kings (Bharata) felt extremely troubled hen he had an  unpleasant dream at dawn. 
2::69::3::Observing him griefstricken his peers who always spoke pleasant words, engaged him in a variety of ways in the assembly in order to divert him.
2::69::4:: In order to provide mental peace to Bharata, some played stringed instruments while some enacted dramatic scenes, some danced and cracked various kinds of jokes. 
2::69::5:: The magnanimous Bharata born in the race of Raghus, was not delighted by the conversations and jokes and soothing words of his friends.  
2::69::6::Addressing Bharata amidst his companions some one close among them said O friend why are you dejected in spite of being in the company of friends.
2::69::7::Addressing his companion who was speaking thus, Bharata replied, saying Listen to the reason this desolation has overtaken me:
2::69::8:: In my dream I saw my father looking pale, with dishevelled hair, his body filled with filth falling from the peak of a mountain into a pool of cow  dung.
2::69::9::I saw my father floating in that pool of cow  dung, drinking oil with cupped palms and  bursting into laughter again and again.
2::69::10:: Thereafter I beheld him eating rice cooked with sesame seeds, his body besmeared with oil plunging again and again into it (the pool).
2::69::11::In that dream I beheld the sea being dried up and the Moon fallen onto the ground. I saw the earth as though enveloped by darkness and obscured, the tusk of an  elephant worthy of a ride by the monarch broken into pieces, a blazing fire  extinguished suddenly, the earth split open, various trees dried up and mountains crumbled and covered with smoke.
2::69::12::In the dream, I beheld my father clad in black clothes and resting on a seat made of iron and the women in dark and brownish complexion laughing at him.
2::69::13:: Thereafter, I beheld that virtuous monarch bedecked with garlands made of red flowers and his body bedaubed with red sandalpaste, hurrying off southward on a chariot yoked with asses.
2::69::14::Finally I beheld a demoness attired in red clothes with an ugly appearance, dragging the king away as if mocking at him. 
2::69::15::I had such a frightful dream last night. Either I, Rama, the king or Lakshmana might  die.
2::69::16::If one beholds in a dream a person setting out on a carriage yoked to asses, the wreath of smoke ascending from his funeral pyre will be seen soon.  
2::69::17::So it is for this reason that I am desolate and cannot respond well to your conversation. It appears as if my throat is getting parched up and my mind is illdisposed. 
2::69::18::I do not see any reason for apprehension but I experience only fear. My voice has degenerated. My appearance looks haggard. Without any reason whatsoever I detest myself. 
2::69::19::On observing the course of this nightmare, with all those images formerly unconceived and having thought of the king's incomprehensible presence, a great fear that has gripped my heart does not leave me.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनसप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyninth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki
