2::11::1::To the ruler of the earth (the king), struck by the darts of Kamadeva and overtaken by passion Kaikeyi spoke (these) dreadful words.
2::11::2::O king I have neither been offended nor disregarded by any one, but I have a purpose which you should fulfil.
2::11::3::If you are inclined to accomplish my desire, then promise me that you will fulfil them. Thereafter I shall reveal it to you.
2::11::4::The mighty king steeped in passion gently held Kaikeyi's hair in his hands  and with a clear, bright smile said:
2::11::5::O proud lady, don't you know there exists for me no woman dearer than you and      no man other than Rama who is the best among men.
2::11::6::I swear in the name of the scion of the Raghu dynasty, the invincible, broadminded Rama, the best among men worthy of long life. Tell me what you have in mind.
2::11::7::O Kaikeyi, in the name of Rama without seeing whom I, for sure, cannot live a momment, I swear I will fulfil your desire.
2::11::8::O Kaikeyi I wish the best among men Rama well.Even at the expense of my life or the lives of the rest of my sons I swear in his name I shall fulfil your wish.
2::11::9::O gentle lady my heart is sinking. Touch my heart and deliver me from distress. O Kaikeyi considering all this, tell me what you think is good.
2::11::10::You know fully the authority you wield over me. Therefore, it does not behove you to doubt me. I swear on my acquired merits that I shall do whatever pleases you.
2::11::11:: Bent upon her interests, the queen cheered and expressed in unutterable words her premeditated  wish which had no alternative. 
2::11::12::Delighted by the words (of the king), Kaikeyi disclosed him her highly dreadful wish which entered her mind like a sudden visitation of death:
2::11::13::You are repeatedly swearing to grant me boons. Let the thirtythree crore gods headed by  the firegod, listen.
2::11::14::Let the Moon and the Sun, the sky, the planets, night and day, the (ten) quarters the world, gandharvas, rakshasas, this earth, the nocturnal spirits all beings, family deities of every house and all other beings listen to your words of promise.
2::11::15::King Dasaratha who is true to his vows, heroic and knows the ways of righteousness is granting me boons with a wellcomposed mind. Let all the gods  stand witness to this (declared Kaikeyi).
2::11::16::Clasping the great archer, the infatuated king, conferer of boons and flattering him (to the top of her bent), the queen said:
2::11::17::O king, recall the event that happened long ago in the war between gods and asuras where the enemy destroyed all your forces except your life.
2::11::18::O king, I rescued you there. Since I was alert to protect you, you granted me two boons.
2::11::19::O protector of the earth, O king, honest in keeping promises, I (now) seek those two boons which were reserved as deposits.
2::11::20::The boons you have vowed to give shall rightfully be given to me. If not, disgraced by you I shall give up my life right away.
2::11::21::The king now came under the control of Kaikeyi by his own words like a deer that jumps into the trap for its own destruction.
2::11::22::Thereafter, she said to the infatuated king who had promised to confer her boons, O lord of the earth, O king, right now I shall speak to you about the two boons granted by you. Listen to my words.
2::11::23::Preparations for Rama's consecration have been made. With these very materials for installation, my son Bharata should be consecrated.
2::11::24::Then in the war between gods and asuras, O lord, pleased with me you have promised a second boon and the time has come to grant it.
2::11::25::Consigned to the Dandaka forest for fourteen years, clad in bark and deer skin and wearing matted hair, Rama shall live like an ascetic.
2::11::26:: Let Bharata be princeregent without any rivals. This is my great desire. I am asking for an already granted boon. Let me see Rama's departure to the forest today itself. 
2::11::27::O king of kings, by being true to your vow, protect your race, character and lineage. Those sages whose ascetism is their wealth maintain that there is no merit superior to truthfulness which can confer man a place in the other world.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकादशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the eleventh sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
