2::9::1::एवम् thus, उक्ता spoken to (by Manthara), कैकेयी Kaikeyi, क्रोधेन (कोपेन) in anger, ज्वलितानना face burning (with anger), दीर्घम् deep, उष्णम् hot, विनिश्वस्य having breathed, मन्थराम् to Manthara, इदम् these words, अब्रवीत् said 
2::9::2::अद्य today, अहम् I, रामम् to Rama, इत: from here itself, क्षिप्रम् quickly, वनम् to the forest,  प्रस्थापयामि shall send forth, भरतं च to Bharata also, क्षिप्रमेव without delay, यौवराज्ये as prince regent, अभिषेचये I shall consecrate (him).
2::9::3::मन्थरे O Manthara केन उपायेन, कथञ्चन by any means, राज्यम् kingdom, प्राप्नुयात् will get, राम: तु for sure, न shall not (obtain), इदम् this one, इदानीम् now, सम्पश्य do see.
2::9::4::तया देव्या by that queen, एवम् thus, उक्ता having been addressed, पापदर्शिनी evilminded  रामार्थम् Rama's interests, उपहिंसन्ती destroying, कैकेयीम् to Kaikeyi, इदम् this, अब्रवीत् said.
2::9::5::हन्त what joy, कैकेयि O Kaikeyi, केवलम् alone, ते पुत्र: your son, भरत: Bharata, यथा as, राज्यम् kingdom, प्राप्स्यति will get, प्रवक्ष्यामि I shall tell, मे my (word), श्रूयतां च listen.
2::9::6::कैकेयि O Kaikeyi, उच्यमानम् which is going to be told, आत्मार्थम् (the means) for your welfare, त्वम् you, मत्त: from me, श्रोतुम् to hear, यत् इच्छसि since you wish, न स्मरसि किम्   do you not remember that ?, स्मरन्ती remembering, निगूहसे वा or are you concealing it? 
2::9::7::विलासिनि O lovely one (Kaikeyi), मया by me, उच्यमानम् while being told, श्रोतुम् to hear      (from me), ते to you, छन्द: यदि if it pleases, अभिधास्यामि I shall tell you, श्रूयताम् listen, श्रुत्वा having heard, विमृश्यताम् अपि च also think over it.
2::9::8::कैकेयी Kaikeyi, तस्या: मन्थराया: that  Manthara's, एवम् in this way, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा (एव)  after hearing, स्वास्तीर्णात् from the wellspread, शयनात् from the bed, किञ्चित् a little, उत्थाय got up, इदम् this, अब्रवीत् said. 
2::9::9::मन्थरे O Manthara केन by what, उपायेन means, भरत: Bharata, राज्यम् kingdom, प्राप्नुयात् will secure, राम: तु as for Rama, कथञ्चन anyhow, न will not get, उपायम् means,  त्वम् you, मम to me, कथय speak.
2::9::10::तया देव्या by that queen, एवम् in this way, उक्ता having been spoken to, पापदर्शिनी evileyed, मन्थरा Manthara, रामार्थम् Rama's interest, उपहिंसन्ती ruining, कुब्जा hunchback, अब्रवीत् said.
2::9::11::देवि O queen तव your, पति: husband, दैवासुरे between gods and asuras, युद्धे in the war, देवराजस्य of the king of the gods (Indra's), साह्यकृत् one who rendered assistance, त्वाम् you, उपादाय having taken, दक्षिणां दिशम् the southern direction, आस्थाय having reached, दण्डकान् प्रति towards Dandaka, वैजयन्तम् इति known as Vaijayanta, ख्यातम् renowned, यत्र where, तिमिध्वज: Timidhvaja, पुरम् to the city, राजर्षिभि: सह along with royal saints, अगच्छत् went.
2::9::12::शम्बर: इति as Sambara, ख्यात: wellknown, शतमाय: possessing a hundred deceitful forms, स: महासुर: that mighty asura, देवसङ्घै: by hosts of gods, अनिर्जित: could not be conquered, शक्रस्य for Indra, सङ्ग्रामम् battle, ददौ gave.  
2::9::13::महति great, तस्मिन् सङ्ग्रामे in that war, क्षतविक्षतान् those wounded, रात्रौ during the night, प्रसुप्तान् those who were fast asleep, पुरुषान् the warriors, राक्षसा: by rakshasas, आसाद्य having approached, तरसा by force, घ्नन्ति स्म killed.
2::9::14::तदा then, दशरथ: राजा king Dasaratha, तत्र there, महद्युद्धम् great battle, अकरोत् fought, महाबाहु: one with mighty arms (Dasaratha), असुरै: च by asuras, शस्त्रै: with weapons, शकलीकृत: च his body was shattered to pieces.
2::9::15::देवि O queen (Kaikeyi), नष्टचेतन: (Dasaratha) who lost consciousness, त्वया by you, सङ्ग्रामात् from the battlefield, अपवाह्य after being carried away, रक्षित: was protected, तत्रापि there also, शस्त्रै: by weapons, विक्षत: wounded, ते पति: your husband, त्वया by you, रक्षित: saved.
2::9::16::शुभदर्शने O auspiciouslooking one, तुष्टेन by the gratified, तेन by him, ते to you, द्वौ two, वरौ boons, दत्तौ were given, देवि O queen त्वया by you, स: पति: that husband, Dasaratha, यदा whenever, इच्छेयम् I desire, तदा then, वरौ the boons, गृह्णीयाम् इति shall receive, उक्त: thus told, तत् that one, तथा इति 'So be it' saying so, तेन महात्मना by that magnanimous (king), उक्तम् has been told.
2::9::17::देवि O queen अहम् I, अनभिज्ञा हि surely unaware of this, पुरा formerly, त्वयैव by yourself, कथिता was related, एषा कथा this story, तव your, स्नेहात् तु out of affection, मया by me, मनसा in mind, धार्यते retained, निगृह्य by force, रामाभिषेकसम्भारान् preparations for Rama's consecration, विनिवर्तय prevent. 
2::9::18::भरतस्य Bharata's, अभिषेचनम् installation, चतुर्दश fourteen, वर्षाणि years, रामस्य Rama's, प्रव्राजनम् banishment, तौ those, वरौ two  boons, त्वम् you, भर्तारम् your husband, याच beg. 
2::9::19::रामे having Rama, चतुर्दश वर्षाणि for fourteen years, वनम् to the forest, प्रव्राजिते if banished, पुत्र: your son, प्रजाभावगतस्नेह: by affectionately winning the hearts of the people, स्थिर: भविष्यति will be firmly established.
2::9::20::अश्वपते: Ashwapati's, सुते daughter (Kaikeyi ), अद्य now, क्रुद्धेव like a person in angry mood, क्रोधागारम् chamber of wrath, प्रविश्य having entered, मलिनवासिनी wearing soiled garments, अनन्तर्हितायाम् not covered (with clothes, etc), भूमौ on the ground, शेष्व lie down.
2::9::21::तम् him (Dasaratha), दृष्ट्वा having seen, शोकलालसा absorbed in grief, रुदन्ती in tears,  एनम् him, मा स्म प्रत्युदीक्षेथा: do not look at him, एनम् him, मा चैव अभिभाषथा: also do not talk with him.
2::9::22::त्वम् you, सदा always, भर्तु: for your husband, दयिता  a beloved one, अत्र in this matter, मे to me, संशय: doubt, नास्ति not there, त्वत्कृते for your sake, स: महाराज: that great king, हुताशनम् in the burning fire, विशेदपि will enter.
2::9::23::राजा king, त्वाम् you, क्रोधयितुम् to make angry, न शक्त: is not capable, क्रुद्धाम् at (your) angry face, प्रत्युदीक्षितुम् to look at, न is not possible, तव your, प्रियार्थम् for pleasure, प्राणानपि even his life, परित्यजेत् हि will forsake indeed.
2::9::24::महीपति: lord of the earth (king), तव your, वाक्यम् words, अतिक्रमितुम् to transgress, न शक्त: हि is not able, मन्दस्वभावे evilnatured, आत्मन: your own, सौभाग्यबलम् power of your beauty, बुध्यस्व recognise.
2::9::25::दशरथ: राजा king Dasaratha, मणिमुक्तासुवर्णानि gems, pearls and gold, विविधानि of different kinds, रत्नानि च precious stones also, दद्यात् may give, तेषु in them, मन: mind, मा कृथा: do not pay attention
2::9::26::महाभागे O highly fortunate one, दशरथ: of Dasaratha, दैवासुरे युद्धे in the war between gods and demons, यौ which, तौ two, वरौ boons, अददात् had given, तौ those two, स्मारय remind, अर्थ: the objective, त्वाम् you, अतिक्रमेत् may not transgress. 
2::9::27::राघव: the descendant of the Raghus (Dasaratha), स्वयम् personally, उत्थाप्य lifting you up from the floor, ते to you, वरम् boon, यदा when, दद्यात् gives then, त्वम् you, तं महाराजम् to that monarch, व्यवस्थाप्य making him settle down, इमम् वरम् this boon, वृणुया: you may  seek.  
2::9::28::पार्थिवर्षभ: best of kings, रामम् to Rama, नव पञ्च वर्षाणि for fourteen years, अरण्ये in the forest, प्रव्राजय exile, भरत: Bharata, पृथिव्या: of this earth, राजा as king, क्रियताम् be made.
2::9::29::रामे of Rama, चतुर्दश वर्षाणि for fourteen years, वनम् to the forest, प्रव्राजिते having been exiled, ते सुत: your son, रूढ: च will grow strong, कृतमूल: च and deeprooted, शेषम् for the  remaining time, स्थास्यति shall remain (stable).
2::9::30::देवि O Devi रामप्रव्राजनं चैव Rama's exile, too, वरम् as a boon, तम् him, याचस्व solicit, भामिनि O lovely one, एवम् this way, तव your, पुत्रस्य son's, सर्वार्था: all the interests, सिद्ध्यन्ति will be fulfilled (protected).
2::9::31::एवम् thus, प्रव्राजित: exiled, राम: Rama, अराम: will no longer cause any delight to people, भविष्यति will become, भरतश्च Bharata also, राजा as king, हतामित्रश्च with  enemies destroyed, भविष्यति will become.
2::9::32::येन कालेन by the time, राम: च Rama also, वनात् from the forest, प्रत्यागमिष्यति returns, तेन कालेन by then, ते your, आत्मवान् confident, पुत्र: son, सुगृहीतमनुष्य: people whose affection has been gained, सुहृद्भि: सार्धम् in the company of friends, कृतमूल: deeprooted, भविष्यति will become.
2::9::33::राजानम् the king, प्राप्तकालं नु proper time has come, मन्ये I consider, वीतसाध्वसा devoid of fear, निगृह्य forcibly, रामाभिषेकसङ्कल्पात् from the intention of installing Rama, विनिवर्तय refrain.
2::9::34::तया by her, अनर्थम् evil design, अर्थरूपेण as a beneficial objective, ग्राहिता having been made to accept, सा कैकेयी that Kaikeyi, तत: after that, प्रतीता having believed, हृष्टा with delight, मन्थराम् addressing Manthara, इदम् this word, अब्रवीत् said.
2::9::35::परमदर्शना endowed with sound foresight, सा कैकेयी that Kaikeyi, कुब्जाया: hunchback, वाक्येन with the words of, परम् great, विस्मयम् गता experiencing surprise, किशोरीव like an (immature) young girl, उत्पथम् a wrong path, गता adopted.
2::9::36::कुब्जे O hunchback श्रेष्ठाभिधायिनीम् speaking excellent words, त्वाम् you, श्रेष्ठाम् as the best, नाभिजानामि I did not recognise, बुद्धिनिश्चये in ascertaining intelligence, पृथिव्याम् in this world, कुब्जानाम् among the hunchbacks, उत्तमा असि you are the best one.
2::9::37::कुब्जे O hunchback, त्वमेव you alone, मम my, अर्थेषु in (my) affairs, नित्ययुक्ता always showing  interest, हितैषिणी seeking welfare, अहम् I, राज्ञ: king's, चिकीर्षितम् the intended action, न समवबुध्येयम् I might not have known.  
2::9::38::कुब्जा: hunchbacks, दुस्संस्थिता: women physically retarded, वक्रा: crooked, परमदारुणा: terrible in appearance, सन्ति are, सन्नता bent, त्वम् you, वातेन by breeze, पद्ममिव like a lotus, प्रियदर्शना one with good looks.
2::9::39::ते उर: your breasts, अभिनिविष्टम् are thick, यावत्स्कन्धात् up to the shoulders, समुन्नतम् is high, अधस्तात् beneath it, सुनाभम् beautiful naval, उदरं च belly also, लज्जितं इव as if bashful , शातम् is slender.
2::9::40::जघनम् hips, परिपूर्णम् full, पयोधरौ breasts, सुपीनौ round and plump, वक्त्रम् countenance, विमलेन्दुसमम् equals the bright moon, मन्थरे O Manthara अहो राजसि how passionate you look.
2::9::41::तव your, रशनादामशोभितम् glittering with girdle, जघनम् hips, निर्घुष्टम् jingling, जङ्घे the calfs of the legs, भृशम् exceedingly, उपन्यस्ते are set strong, उभौ both, पादौ च your feet also, आयतौ are long.
2::9::42::मन्थरे O Manthara, आयताभ्याम् heavy, सक्थिभ्याम् with both thighs, त्वम् you, क्षौमवासिनी clad in silk garment, मम my, अग्रत: in front of, गच्छन्ती walking, राजहंसीव like female royal swan, राजसे shine.
2::9::43::असुराधिपे king of the asuras, शम्बरे that Sambara, याः those, सहस्रश: मायाः a thousand deceitful means, आसन् lay, ताः those, सर्वाः all, भूयः many more, सहस्रशः in thousands, अन्याश्च others also, त्वयि in you, निविष्टाः reside.
2::9::44::आयतम् wide, रथघोणमिव like the hub of a chariot, दीर्घम् long, तव your, यत् which, इदम् this, स्थगु hump, अत्र here, ते your, मतय: thoughts, क्षत्रविद्या: skills of a kshatriya,  माया: च  also magic powers, वसन्ति are residing.
2::9::45::कुब्जे O hunchback राघवे of the descendant of the Raghus (Rama), वनम् to the forest, गते having gone, भरते च Bharata also, अभिषिक्ते having been consecrated, अत्र here (on this hump), हिरण्मयीम् golden, मालाम् garland, प्रतिमोक्ष्यामि I shall deliver.
2::9::46::मन्थरे O Manthara, लब्धार्था च after accomplishsing the objective, प्रतीता च also satisfied, जात्येन belonging to the best , सुनिष्टप्तेन highly refined, सुवर्णेन with gold, ते स्थगु your hump, लेपयिष्यामि will smear.
2::9::47::कुब्जे O Manthara ते मुखे on  your face, जातरूपमयम् fully made of gold, चित्रम् wonderful, शुभम् auspicious, तिलकम् tilaka (a mark on the forehead), शुभानि beautiful, आभरणानि च ornaments also, कारयिष्यामि shall get them made.
2::9::48::शुभे auspicious, वस्त्रे garments, परिधाय wearing, देवतेव like a goddess, चरिष्यसि you shall move about, चन्द्रम् of moon, आह्वयमानेन challenging, मुखेन with countenance, अप्रतिमानना with a peerless, द्विषज्जनम् amidst your enemies, गर्वयन्ती feeling proud, मुख्याम् eminent, गतिम् state, गमिष्यसि you will attain.
2::9::49::त्वम् you, मम to me, यथैव in that manner, कुब्जाया: other hunchbacks, तव पादौ अपि your feet also, कुब्जा: other humpbacks, सर्वाभरणभूषिता: adorned with all ornaments, सदा परिचरिष्यन्ति will always serve you.
2::9::50::इति thus, प्रशस्यमाना being praised, सा that(Manthara), वेद्याम् on a sacrificial altar, अग्निशिखामिव like a flaming fire, शुभ्रे white, शयने in the couch, शयानाम् lying down, कैकेयीम् addressing Kaikeyi, इदम् this, अब्रवीत् said.
2::9::51::कल्याणि O fortunate one, गतोदके after the water has flowed out, सेतुबन्ध: construction of a dam, न विधीयते not undertaken, उत्तिष्ठ you may arise, कल्याणम् auspicious act, कुरु perform, राजानम् (to the) king, अनुदर्शय show(such act).
2::9::52::विशालाक्षी  largeeyed one, सौभाग्यमदगर्विता proud of her (intoxicating) beauty, वराङ्गना most beautiful lady, देवी queen, तथा that way, प्रोत्साहिता encouraged, कुब्जावाक्यवशंगता influenced by the words of the hunchback, मन्थरया सह with Manthara, क्रोधागारम् chamber of wrath, गत्वा having gone, अनेकशतसाहस्रम् with many hundreds of thousands, मुक्ताहारम् necklace of pearls, वरार्हाणि highly precious, शुभानि auspicious, आभरणानि च other ornaments also, अवमुच्य cast off, तत: after that, हेमोपमा resembling gold, तत्र there, भूमौ on the floor, संविश्य lying down, मन्थराम् to Manthara, इदम् this, अब्रवीत् spoke.      
2::9::53::कुब्जे O hunchback, राघवे to the scion of the Raghus (Rama), वनं तु to the forest, प्राप्ते having gone, भरत: Bharata, क्षितिम् earth, प्राप्स्यति secures, वा or, इह here, माम् me, मृताम् as if dead, नृपाय for  king Dasaratha, आवेदयिष्यसि you will inform.
2::9::54::सुवर्णेन by gold, मे to me, अर्थ: aspiration, न not, रत्नै: with gems, न not, भूषणै: च with ornaments also, न not, राम: Rama, अभिषिच्यते यदि if installed, एष: this (will be), मे my, जीवितस्य life's, अन्त: end.
2::9::55::अथो again, कुब्जा that hunchback, अत्यर्थमहापराक्रमै: with extremely powerful  (sharp), वचोभि: with words, महीक्षित: king's, महिषीम् wife, ताम् that, भरतस्य मातरम् addressing Bharata's mother, हितम् beneficial to her, रामम् उपेत्य relating to Rama, अहितम् harmful, वच: words, पुन: again, उवाच said.
2::9::56::राघव: descendant of the Raghus (Rama), इदम् हि this indeed, राज्यम् kingdom, प्रपत्स्यते यदि if secures, ससुता along with son, त्वम् you, तप्स्यसे you will suffer, ध्रुवम् this is true, कल्याणि auspicious one, अत: for that reason, ते सुत: your son, भरत: Bharata, यथा in a manner in which, अभिषेक्ष्यते will be installed, तत् that act, तथा in that way, यतस्व strive for.
2::9::57::कुब्जया by that hunchback, मुहुर्मुहु: repeatedly, वागिषुभि: by arrowsharp words, तथा in that manner, समाहता struck down, अतिविद्धा hard hit, महिषी queen, कुपिता inflamed, अतिविस्मिता amazed, हस्तौ her hands, हृदये on the chest, निधाय laying, पुन: पुन: again and again, कुब्जाम् to that hunchback, शशंस praised.
2::9::58::कुब्जे O hunchback, निशाम्य having seen, माम् me, इत: from here, यमस्य Yama's, विषयम् region, गताम् had gone, प्रतिवेदयिष्यसि वा or else inform the king, राघवे of Rama, वनम् to the forest, गते had gone, भरत: Bharata, समृद्धकाम: having attained the objective, भविष्यति वा or would be done.
2::9::59::राघव: son of the Raghus (Rama), इत: from here, वनम् to forest, न गच्छति चेत् if does not go, अहम् myself, आस्तरणानि couch, न इच्छामि do not desire, स्रज: न nor garlands, चन्दनम् न nor sandalpaste, अञ्जनपानभोजनम् न nor collyrium, food, water, न किञ्चित् nothing, इह here, जीवितं च not even life, न do not desire.
2::9::60::भामिनी that beautiful one (Kaikeyi), सुदारुणम् dreadful, एतत् वचनम् this word, उक्त्वा having said, अथ after that, सर्वाभरणानि all ornaments, निधाय having removed, पतिता fallen, किन्नरी इव like a 'kinnar', तदा then, आस्तरणेन by a carpet, असंवृताम् uncovered, मेदिनीम् the earth, अधिशिश्ये lay down.
2::9::61::तथा thus, उदीर्णसंरम्भतमोवृतानना her face enveloped in the darkness of violent anger, अवमुक्तोत्तममाल्यभूषणा all valuable ornaments having been stripped off, विमना: mind restless, नरेन्द्रपत्नी king's wife, सा that Kaikeyi, तमोवृता filled with darkness, मग्नतारकाः bereft of stars, द्यौरिव like sky, बभूव became. 
