2::108::1::ब्राह्मणोत्तमः the most virtuous brahmin, जाबालिः Jabali, भरतम् to Bharata, आश्वासयन्तम् consoling (convincing), धर्मज्ञम् cognizant of duty, रामम् to Rama, धर्मापेतम् deviating from  righteousness, इदम् this, वचः words, उवाच said. 
2::108::2::राघव O scion of the Raghu race (Rama), साधु very well, आर्यबुद्धेः of a nobleminded one, मनस्विनः highminded one, ते you, प्राकृतस्य नरस्येव like a common man, एवम् in that way, निरर्थिका nonsensical, बुद्धि: thought, माऽभूत् let there not be.
2::108::3::कः पुरषः which man, कस्य to whom, बन्धु: relation, कस्य to whom, केनचित् from any one, किम् what, आप्यम् is to be obtained, यत् for the reason, जन्तुः a creature, एकः alone, जायते is born, एक एव alone, विनश्यति dies. 
2::108::4::राम O Rama, तस्मात् therefore, यः नरः a man, माता as mother, पिता चेति as father, सज्जेत is attached, सः he, उन्मत्त इव like a madman, सः ज्ञेयः is to be regarded, कश्चित् any one,  कस्य चित् to any one, नास्ति हि is nonexistent.
2::108::5::काकुत्स्थ O Rama, ग्रामान्तरम् from one village to another, गच्छन् while going, कश्चित् नरः a certain man, यथा as, क्वचित् somewhere, वसेत् may rest, तम् आवासम् that place of rest, उत्सृज्य leaving, अपरे on the next, अहनि day, प्रतिष्ठेत may proceed, एवमेव in the same way, मनुष्याणाम् to men, पिता father, माता mother, गृहम् home, वसु wealth, अवासमात्रम् resting places only, अत्र in this matter, सज्जनाः wise people, न सज्जन्ते are not attached to them.
2::108::6::नरोत्तम O best of men, स: such as you, पित्य्रम् father's, राज्यम् kingdom, परित्यज्य abandoning, दुःखम् painful, विषमम् difficult, बहुकण्टकम् full of thorns, कापथम् unwise course, आस्थातुम् to adopt, नार्हसि should not.
2::108::7::समृद्धायाम् in a prosperous, अयोध्यायाम् in the city of Ayodhya, आत्मानम् yourself, अभिषेचय get coronated, नगरी that city, एकवेणीधरा wearing a single braid of hair, त्वाम् you, सम्प्रतीक्षते is awaiting. 
2::108::8::पार्थिवात्मज O king's son, महार्हान् inestimable, राजभोगान् royal plesures, अनुभवन् enjoying, त्वम् you, शक्रः Indra, त्रिविष्ठपे यथा like in heaven, अयोध्यायाम् in Ayodhya, विहर enjoy.
2::108::9::ते to you, दशरथः Dasaratha, कश्चित् न is nobody, त्वं च you also, तस्य to him, कश्चन  न nobody, सः राजा that king, अन्यः another person, त्वम् you, अन्यः another person, तस्मात् therefore, यत् what, उच्यते is being told, कुरु do. 
2::108::10::पिता the father, जन्तोः for a being, बीजमात्रम् is a seed only, शुक्लम् white, रुधिरमेव blood, ऋतुमन्मात्रा in the mother's womb during her menstrual period (favourable time for conception), संयुक्तम् is blended, तत् due to that, इह in this world, पुरुषस्य man's, जन्म birth takes place.
2::108::11::सः that, नृपतिः king, तेन by him, यत्र wherever, गन्तव्यम् ought to go, तत्र there, गतः had gone, मर्त्यानाम् mortals', प्रवृत्ति: (destiny) nature, एषा such is, त्वं तु as for you, मिथ्या fruitlessly, विहन्यसे (undergoing difficulties).
2::108::12::ये ये all those, अर्थधर्मपराः yearning for dharma and artha, तांस्तान् for all of them, शोचामि  feel sad, इतरान् for others, न not, ते they, इह in this world, दुःखम् sorrow, प्राप्य experiencing, प्रेत्य after death, विनाशम् destruction, भेजिरे had obtained (doubt).
2::108::13::अष्टका ashtaka ceremony, पितृदैवत्यम् इति the receivers are the spirits of ancestors, अयम्   जनः these people, प्रसृतः are engaged, अन्नस्य offering of food, उपद्रवम् wastage, पश्य look, मृतः the dead, किम् what, अशिष्यति will it eat? 
2::108::14::इह in this world, अन्येन by one person, भुक्तम् something eaten, अन्यस्य to other man's, देहम् body, गच्छति यदि if it reaches, प्रवसतः living in a distant place,  श्राद्धम् shraddha, दद्यात् may offer, तत् that one, पथि on the way, अशनम् न भवेत् will it not  be food? 
2::108::15::यजस्व perform sacrifices, देहि give away, दीक्षस्व be initiated, तपः religious austerities, तप्यस्व practice, सन्त्यज renounce, एते these, ग्रन्थाः texts mannuals, मेधाविभिः by intelligent men, कृताः have been composed, दानसंवननाः हि to induce people to give charity.
2::108::16::महामते O highminded one, सः such as you, परम् the next world, नास्ति does not exist, इत्येव like that, बुद्धिम् thinking, कुरु do, यत् whatever, प्रत्यक्षम् is evident, तत् that one, आतिष्ठ you practise, परोक्षम् what is beyond perception, पृष्ठतः कुरु turn your back on.
2::108::17::सः त्वम् such as you, सर्वलोकनिदर्शिनीम् that serves as an instance to all, सतां बुद्धिम्   judgement of the wise, पुरस्कृत्य treating with honour, भरतेन by Bharata, प्रसादितः pleased by, राज्यम् kingdom, प्रतिगृह्णीष्व accept.
