2::4::1::After the citizens departed, the king, an expert in decisionmaking again consulted his counsellors and said, Tomorrow Pushya star is in the ascendence and my son, Rama (handsome) with coppercoloured eyes which resemble red lotus petals will be installed heirapparent. 
2::4::2::After the citizens departed, the king, an expert in decisionmaking again consulted his counsellors and said, Tomorrow Pushya star is in the ascendence and my son, Rama (handsome) with coppercoloured eyes which resemble red lotus petals will be installed heirapparent. 
2::4::3:: Therafter king Dasaratha on retiring to his private apartment, ordered Sumantra to bring Rama  once again.
2::4::4::In obedience to the command  of the king charioteer Sumantra set out speedily  to the palace of Rama to fetch him  back once again.
2::4::5:: The doorkeepers informed Rama of Sumantra's arrival. As soon as he learnt that Sumantra was back again, Rama was filled with apprehensions.
2::4::6::Rama  got Sumantra admitted  and said to him, What is the  purpose of your coming back so quickly ? Tell me whatever is there without holding back.
2::4::7::Then Sumantra replied, 'The king desires to see you. To go or not to go, the decision is yours'. 
2::4::8::On hearing the words of the charioteer, Rama immediately set out for the royal  palace to see the king again.
2::4::9::Having heard of Rama's arrival, king Dasaratha got him admitted into his apartment to tell him something very pleasant.
2::4::10::On entering his father's palace, glorious Rama, folded his hands and bent low in reverence from a distance and beheld his father.
2::4::11::As he (Rama) was bending (with reverence), Dasaratha lifted him up and embraced him. Thereafter, he offered him a splendid seat and said again:
2::4::12::O Rama after a long life I have grown old. I have enjoyed all the pleasures I desired. I have also performed hundreds of rituals which enjoined distribution of abundant food and gifts.
2::4::13::O best of men I have obtained now a progeny of my liking in you and you have no equal on earth. I have given gifts, performed rituals and also studied (the Vedas) .
2::4::14::O mighty son I have experienced all the pleasures I longed for. I redeemed my debt to the gods, the sages, my ancestors, brahmins and to myself. 
2::4::15::There is nothing left to be done by me except your consecration Hence you should perform what I  tell you.
2::4::16::Today  all the subjects expresed their desire to see you as their king. Therefore, my dear son, I wish to coronate  you heirapparent.
2::4::17::Moreover Rama, these days I see frightening and ominous events in dreams during day time. I see meteors accompanied by thunders falling, generating great sounds.
2::4::18:: O Rama astrologers also tell me that formidable planets Sun, Mars and Rahu have afflicted my birth star.
2::4::19::When such ominous signs appear, usually the king either meets with  death or faces a grave calamity. 
2::4::20:: Therefore,  before my mind is deluded I wish to see you installed as heirapparent for a man's mind is unstable indeed, O Rama.
2::4::21::Today the Moon is in conjunction with the Punarvasu constellation. Tomorrow the  Moon's conjunction with the Pushya constellation is certain and the astrologers say this auspicious time is highly suitable for the purpose of coronation. 
2::4::22::My mind is hastening me saying,'Coronate  Rama in the Pushya constellation itself'. O Slayer of enemies, I shall install you heirapparent tomorrow.  
2::4::23::Therefore, you and my daughterinlaw (Sita) should fast tonight and sleep on a bed of darbha or kusha grass with selfrestraint.
2::4::24::Many impediments befall  acts of this sort indeed. Alert your friends to protect you  from all sides today onwards.
2::4::25:: While Bharata is away from the city, the time is favourable for your installation. This is my opinion.
2::4::26::It is true, your brother Bharata has adhered to the path of the virtuous and has followed his elder brother. No doubt, he is righteous, compassionate and self controlled.
2::4::27::Yet I think even the propitious minds of those who are virtuous and whose thoughts are fixed in righteousness can also become fickle. 
2::4::28:: Having spoken to Rama about the installation ceremony fixed for the next day, he (Dasaratha) permitted him to leave saying, 'You may go'. Rama paid obeisance to his father and returned to his abode.
2::4::29::With the installation fixed by the king, Rama went into his residence but left immediately to see his mother in her inner apartment.
2::4::30::There he beheld his mother in silk apparel engrossed in silent prayer (to the gods) for his royal fortune in the room meant for the worship of the gods.
2::4::31::Hearing the welcome tidings of the installation of her beloved Rama, Sita too, had been brought in. Sumitra and Lakshmana had already arrived there. 
2::4::32::At that moment Kausalya was meditating with her eyes halfclosed. Sumitra, Lakshmana and Sita were attending on her.   
2::4::33:: Having heard that installation of her son as heirapparent was planned in Pushya constellation, Kausalya was meditating upon the Supreme Person, Lord Visnu by controlling her breath (Pranayama).
2::4::34::While she (Kausalya) was in that state of meditation, Rama approached her, offered reverential salutation and said these words of praise enhancing her joy:
2::4::35::O mother father has assigned me the duties of governing the subjects. My installation takes place tomorrow on my father's command.
2::4::36::Tonight, Sita, the officiating priests and preceptors will take to fasting along with me. This is what father told me. 
2::4::37::The installation takes place tomorrow. Perform today whatever auspicious rituals are appropriate (to the occasion) for me and Vaidehi (Sita).
2::4::38::Hearing this long cherished tiding (relating to installation) Kausalya spoke to Rama in sweet but indistinct words due to tears of joy.
2::4::39::O my dear child, O Rama, may you live long Let your enemies be destroyed. Endowed with prosperity, bring delight to my relatives and those of Sumitra.
2::4::40::O Rama, my little child you were born to me under a lucky star. On this account you have delighted your father Dasaratha with your virtues. What a joy 
2::4::41::O my son my devotion to the lotuseyed Visnu, enduring the pain (of observance of vows and fasting) have not gone in vain.The royal fortune of the Ikshvakus will pass on to  you. What a joy 
2::4::42::Thus spoken to by his mother, Rama looked at his brother Lakshmana sitting humbly with folded palms and with a smile said to him:
2::4::43:: O Lakshmana rule this earth together with me. This royal fortune also accrues to you, for you are my second innermost self.
2::4::44:: O, son of Sumitra, enjoy all pleasures you wish and the fruits of royalty. I desire  this life and kingdom for your sake only.
2::4::45:: After speaking to Lakshmana, Rama made reverential salutation to the two mothers and on obtaining their consent to leave with Sita, returned to his abode.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे चतुर्थस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fourth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
