2::86::1::अथ then, गहनगोचरः forest ranger, गुहः Guha, अप्रमेयाय to a man of immeasurable (virtues), भरताय to Bharata, महात्मनः of the magnanimous, लक्ष्मणस्य Lakshmana's, सद्भावम् good nature, आचचक्षे explained.
2::86::2::अहम् I, भ्रातृगुप्त्यर्थम् for the sake of protecting his brother, अत्यन्तम् completely, जाग्रतम् keeping awake, शरचापासिधारिणम् holding arrows, bow and sword, गुणैः with virtues, युक्तम् endowed with, तं लक्ष्मणम् that Lakshmana, अबृवम् I said.
2::86::3::राघवनन्दन delight of the race of Raghu, तात my friend, (लक्ष्मण Lakshmana), सुखा comfortable, इयम् this, शय्या couch, त्वदर्थम् for your sake, उपकल्पिता has been arranged, प्रत्याश्वसिहि be assured, अस्याम् upon it, सुखम् peacefully, शेष्व lie down.
2::86::4::धर्मात्मन् O righteous one, अयम् this, सर्वः all, जनः people, दुःखानाम् for hardships, उचितः  are accustomed, त्वम् you, सुखोचितः are used to comfort, तस्य for Rama's, गुप्त्यर्थम् for the sake of protection, वयम् we, जागरिष्यामहे will stay awake. 
2::86::5::मम for me, भुवि on earth, रामात् more than Rama, प्रियतरः dearer, कश्चन none, नास्ति हि does not exist, अथ and, उत्सुकः anxious, मा भूः do not have, तव your, अग्रतः in presence, एतत् this, सत्यम् truthful, वाक्यम् words, ब्रवीमि I am telling. 
2::86::6::अस्य this Rama's, प्रसादात् grace, अस्मिन् in this लोके world, सुमहत् great, यशः renown, विपुलाम् abundance of, धर्मावाप्तिं च advantage of righteousness, केवलम् solely, अर्थकामौ च  artha (prosperity) and kama (pleasure), आशंसे I desire.
2::86::7::सः अहं as for me, सर्वैः with all, स्वैः own, ज्ञातिभिः सह with relatives, सीतया सह along with Sita, शयानम् asleep, प्रियसखम् dear friend, रामम् to Rama, धनुष्पाणिः bow in hand, रक्षिष्यामि I will protect. 
2::86::8::अस्मिन् वने in this forest, सदा always, चरतः ranging, मे to me, अविदितम् unknown, किञ्चित् nothing, न हि not, वयम् we, युधि in the battle, चतुरङ्गं बलम् अपि four divisions of the army also, प्रसहेम हि will withstand. 
2::86::9::एवं thus, अस्माभिः by us, उक्तेन having been uttered, महात्मना by the  magnanimous, धर्ममेव virtuousness alone, अनुपश्यता seeing, लक्ष्मणेन by Lakshmana, वयम् we, सर्वे all, अनुनीताः  have been entreated.
2::86::10::दाशरथौ Rama, सीतया सह with Sita, भूमौ on the ground, शयाने while sleeping, मया by me,  निद्रा sleep, लब्धुम् to obtain, कथम् how, शक्या is it possible, जीवितं वा either life, सुखानि वा  or comforts. 
2::86::11::गुह O Guha, यः that Rama, सर्वैः by all, देवासुरैः by gods and demons, युधि in battle, प्रसहितुं  to withstand, न शक्यः not possible, तम् him, सीतया सह with Sita, तृणेषु on the grass, संविष्टम् lying down, पश्य behold.
2::86::12::एषः this Rama, महता by great, तपसा with austerities, विविधैः by various, परिश्रमैश्च with   efforts as well, लब्धः was obtained, दशरथस्य Dasaratha's, एकः one, सदृशलक्षणः one with very similar virtues, पुत्रः is the son.   
2::86::13::अस्मिन् when he, प्रव्राजिते is exiled, राजा king Dasaratha, चिरम् for a long time, न वर्तयिष्यति will not survive, नूनम् surely, मेदिनी earth, क्षिप्रमेव soon, विधवा widow, भविष्यति will become.
2::86::14::स्त्रियः women, सुमहानादम् loud sounds, विनद्य having cried, श्रमेण with exhaustion, उपरताः  have ceased, अद्य now, राजनिवेशने in the king's palace, निर्घोषः clamour, नूनम् surely, विरतः   has subsided.
2::86::15::कौसल्या चैव even Kausalya, राजा च king also, तथैव in the same way, मम जननी my mother, ते सर्वे all of them, इमाम् this, रजनीम् night, यदि जीवेयुः if they are alive, नाशंसे I do not think.
2::86::16::मे माता my mother, शत्रुघ्नस्य Satrughna's, अन्ववेक्षया looking at, जीवेदपि च might be alive, वीरसूः mother of a warrior, या कौसल्या that Kausalya, सा तु as for her, दुःखिता with extreme grief, विनशिष्यति will die. 
2::86::17::मे पिता my father, अतिक्रान्तम् अतिक्रान्तम् gone by one after another, मनोरथम् cherished desire, अनवाप्य without fulfilling, राज्ये in the kingdom, रामम् Rama, अनिक्षिप्य without placing, विनशिष्यति will pass away.
2::86::18::तस्मिन्काले when that moment, उपस्थिते had arrived, वृत्तम् being in that state, पितरम् my father, भूमिपम् for the lord of the earth, सर्वेषु all, प्रेतकार्येषु in funeral rites, संस्करिष्यन्ति will perform, सिद्धार्थाः men who attained their purpose. 
2::86::19::रम्यचत्वरसस्थानाम् with lovely crossroads and squares, सुविभक्तमहापथाम् welllaid  highways, हर्म्यप्रासादसंपन्नाम् full of mansions and palaces, सर्वरत्नविभूषिताम् encrusted with every kind of precious stone, गजाश्वरथसंबाधाम् full of elephants, horses and chariots, तूर्यनादविनादिताम् resounding with trumpets, सर्वकल्याणसंपूर्णाम् with universal wellbeing, हृष्टपुष्टजनाकुलाम् crowded with healthy people, आरामोद्यानसंपूर्णाम् with plenty of pleasuregardens and parks, समाजोत्सवशालिनीम् shining with community festivities, मम पितुः my father's, राजधानीम् capital (Ayodhya), सुखिताः with all comforts, विचरिष्यन्ति will move  about.
2::86::20::वयं we, आस्मिन् in this, समये the time, निवृत्ते returning, सत्यप्रतिज्ञेन who fulfilled his vow, कुशलिना सार्धं along with him in safe condition, सुखिताः with happiness, अपि प्रविशेमहि will we enter Ayodhya? 
2::86::21::सुमहात्मनः of the highminded, एवं in this way, परिदेवयमानस्य lamenting so, तस्य राजपुत्रस्य that prince, तिष्ठतः while waiting, सा शर्वरी that night, अत्यवर्तत elapsed.
2::86::22::विमले when bright, सूर्ये Sun, प्रभाते at dawn, उभौ both, आस्मिन् in this, भागीरथीतीरे on the bank of Bhagirathi, जटाः matting their hair, कारयित्वा made, मया by me, सुखम् comfortably, सन्तारितौ were ferried. 
2::86::23::जटाधरौ wearing matted hair, द्रुमचीरवाससौ those two dressed in bark robes, महाबलौ of great strength, कुञ्जरयूथपोपमौ comparable to elephants, वरेषुचापासिधरौ armed with excellent bows, arrows and swords, तौ both, परन्तपौ slayers of enemies, व्यपेक्षमाणौ looking back alertly, सीतया सह along with Sita, गतौ went. 
