2::67::1::अयोध्यायाम् in Ayodhya, आक्रन्दितनिरानन्दा rendered cheerless by the lamentations, सास्रकण्ठजनाकुला filled with sobbing people, अवतताः stretched interminably, सा शर्वरी that night, व्यतीयाय passed away.
2::67::2::ततः then, शर्वर्याम् when the night, व्यतीतायां तु passed, आदित्यस्य उदये at sunrise, राजकर्तारः those who perform royal investiture, द्विजातयः brahmins, समेत्य having been called, सभाम् assembly hall, ईयुः reached. 
2::67::3::मार्कण्डेयः Markandeya, अथ and, मौद्गल्यः Maudgalya, अथ also, काश्यपः Kasyapa, कात्यायनः Katyayana, गौतमश्च Gautama also, महायशाः of great renown, जाबालिश्च Jabali too, एते  these, द्विजाः brahmins, अमात्यैः सह with ministers, श्रेष्ठम् the chief, राजपुरोहितम् king's priest, वसिष्ठमेव Vasistha himself, अभिमुखाः approached, पृथक् different, वाचम् opinions  उदीरयन् expressed.
2::67::4::अस्मिन् पार्थिवे this king, पुत्रशोकेन out of grief over (seperation from) his son, पञ्चत्वम् dissolution into the five elements (death), आपन्ने having attained, या that night, नः for us, वर्षशतोपमा like a hundred years, शर्वरी such night, दुःखम्  sorrowful, अतीता passed.
2::67::5::महाराजः the great king, स्वर्गतश्च had attained heaven, रामश्च Rama also, अरण्यम् in the forest, आश्रितः taken refuge, तेजस्वी lustrous, लक्ष्मणश्च Lakshmana, रामेणैव सह with Rama, गतः went.
2::67::6::परन्तपौ destroyers of enemies, भरतशत्रुघ्नौ Bharata and Satrughna, उभौ both, केकयेषु in the Kekaya kingdom, राजगृहे at Rajagriha, पुरे city, रम्ये beautiful, मातामहनिवेशने are in maternal grandfather's palace.
2::67::7::इक्ष्वाकूणाम् in the race of Ikshvakus, कश्चित् anyone, इह here, अद्यैव right now, राजा as king, विधीयताम् should be made, अराजकम् without a king, नः our, राष्ट्रम् country, विनाशम्  destruction, (सम् अव) आप्नुयात् will attain.
2::67::8::अराजके where there is no king, जनपदे in a country, विद्युन्माली garlanded with a row of lightning, महास्वनः thunderous, पर्जन्यः raingod, महीम् the earth, दिव्येन with celestial, वारिणा with rain, नाभिवर्षति does not shower.
2::67::9::अराजके where there is no king, जनपदे in a country, बीजमुष्टिः handfuls of seeds, न प्रकीर्यते will not be sown (sprout), अराजके where there no king, पुत्र: son, भार्या वा or wife, पितुः father's, वशे control, न वर्तते do not remain.
2::67::10::अराजके when there is no king, धनम् wealth, नास्ति not, अराजके without a king, भार्यापि even wife, नास्ति is not, अत्याहितम् cause of great peril, अन्यत् another, इदं च this one also exists, अराजके where there no king, सत्यम् truth, कुतः where?
2::67::11::अराजके where there is no king, जनपदे in a country, नराः people, हृष्टाः rejoiced, सभाम्  assembly, रम्याणि delightful, उद्यानानि gardens, पुण्यगृहाणि sacred edifices (like temples), न कारयन्ति are not built.
2::67::12::अराजके without a king, जनपदे in a country, यज्ञशीलाः where sacrificial ceremonies are conducted, दान्ताः selfcontrolled, ब्राह्मणाः versed in the study of Vedas, संशितव्रताः of rigorous austerity, द्विजातयः brahmins, सत्राणि sacrifices, न अन्वासते do not practise. 
2::67::13::अराजके without a king, जनपदे in a country, महायज्ञेषु in great sacrifices, यज्वनः the officiating priests, वसुसम्पन्नाः wealthy, ब्राह्मणाः brahmins, आप्तदक्षिणाः abundant gifts, न विसृजन्ति do not offer.
2::67::14::अराजके where there is no king, जनपदे in a country, प्रभूतनटनर्तकाः actors and dancers in large numbers, राष्ट्रवर्धनाः promoting the welfare of the country, उत्सवाश्च celebrations, समाजाश्च assemblies, न वर्धन्ते do not prosper.
2::67::15::अराजके where there is no king, जनपदे in a country, व्यवहारिणः those engaged in lawsuits, सिद्धार्थाः succeed, न not, कथाशीलाः those who are accustomed to storytelling, कथाप्रियैः with those who love to listen to stories, कथाभिः with stories, न अनुरज्यन्ते are not entertained.
2::67::16::अराजके without a king, जनपदे in a country, हेमभूषिताः adorned with golden ornaments, कुमार्यः maidens, समागताः having met together, सायाह्ने in the evening, क्रीडितुम् for sporting, उद्यानानि in the pleasure gardens, नयान्ति will not go.
2::67::17::अराजके without a king, जनपदे in a country, कामिनः pleasureseeking men, नराः men, नारीभिः with women too, शीघ्रगामिभिः by swift moving, वाहनैः chariots, अरण्यानि in the woods (for recreation), न निर्यान्ति will not go.
2::67::18::अराजके without a king, जनपदे in a country, कृषिगोरक्षजीविनः living by farming and  protecting cattle, धनवन्तः wealthy people, सुरक्षिताः wellprotected, विवृतद्वाराः with the doors wide open, न शेरते do not sleep.
2::67::19::अराजके without a king, जनपदे in a country, षष्टिहायनाः sixty years of age, कुञ्जराः elephants, बद्धघण्टाविषाणिनः of tusks adorned with bells, राजमार्गेषु on the highways, न अटन्ति will not wander about.
2::67::20::अराजके without a king, जनपदे in a country, इष्वस्त्राणाम् arrows and weapons, उपासने practising (the discharge of), सन्ततम् ceaselessly, शरान् arrows, अस्यताम् shooters  throwing, तलनिर्घोषः clappings of the cord on the skin shield (Tala means a protective covering made of hard skin worn on the left hand to prevent injury), न श्रूयते are not heard.
2::67::21::अराजके without a king, जनपदे in a country, दूरगामिनः travelling long distances, वणिजः merchants, बहुपण्यसमाचिताः with several kinds of marketable goods, क्षेमम् safely, अध्वानम् on the way, न गच्छन्ति do not go.
2::67::22::अराजके where there is no king, जनपदे in a country, एकचरः moving alone, वशी selfcontrolled, आत्मना in mind, आत्मानाम् on the higher self, भावयन् contemplating, यत्रसायं गृहः inn, मुनिः ascetic, न चरति does not wander.
2::67::23::नाराजके without a king, जनपदे in a country, योगक्षेमम् security of possession, न प्रवर्तते does not exist, अराजके without a king, सेना army, युधि in a battle, शत्रून् enemies, न विषहते not be able to oppose. 
2::67::24::अराजके without a king, जनपदे in the country, नराः men, परिमण्डिताः welldressed, हृष्टैः enthusiastically, परमवाजिभिः of excellent horses, रथैश्च chariots, सहसा at once, न संयान्ति will not go.
2::67::25::अराजके with no king, जनपदे in the country, शास्त्रविशारदाः those wellversed in scriptures, नराः people, वनेषु in the forests, उपवनेषु च in the (recreational) gardens, संवदन्तः conversing, न अवतिष्ठन्ते do not stay.
2::67::26::अराजके where there is no king, जनपदे in the country, नियतैः by disciplined ones in spiritual practices, जनैः people, देवताभ्यर्चनार्थाय for worshipping the gods, माल्यमोदकदक्षिणाः garlands of flowers, sweetmeats and alms, न कल्प्यन्ते  do not arrange.
2::67::27::अराजके where there is no king, जनपदे in the country, राजपुत्रा: princes, चन्दनागरुरूषिताः  anointed with sandal paste and agaru, वसन्ते in spring time, शाखिनः इव like trees, न राजन्ते do not look graceful.
2::67::28::अनुदकाः without water, नद्यः rivers, यथा as, आतृणम् without vegetation, वनम् forest, यथा वा or as, आगोपालाः without cowherds, गावः cows, यथा as, अराजकम् without a king, राष्ट्रम्  country, तथा is like that.
2::67::29::रथस्य of the chariot, ध्वजः the pennant, प्रज्ञानम् a mark of identification, विभावसोः for fire, धूमः smoke, ज्ञानम् is a mark of identification, तेषाम् for such, नः for us, यः that, ध्वजः  pennant  (with his magnanimity we are recognised), सः राजा that king, इतः from here, देवत्वम् to heaven, गतः has gone.
2::67::30::अराजके where there is no king, जनपदे in the country, कस्य चित् for any one, स्वकम् as his own, न भवति does not exist, नराः men, मत्स्याः इव like fish, नित्यम् ceaselessly, परस्परम्  one another, भक्षयन्ति devour. 
2::67::31::सम्भिन्नमर्यादाः those disregarding the bounds of morality, छिन्नसंशयाः dispelling doubts, ये हि those, नास्तिकाः atheists, तेऽपि they also, राजदण्डनिपीडिताः when subjected to royal  punishment, भावाय for virtuous path, कल्पन्ते adopt.
2::67::32::दृष्टिः eye, नित्यमेव perpetually, यथा as, शरीरस्य of the body (for its protection), प्रवर्तते is engaged, तथा similarly, नरेन्द्रः king, राष्ट्रस्य for the country's, सत्यधर्मयोः for truth and ethics, प्रभवः is the source.
2::67::33::राजा king, सत्यं च truth, धर्मश्च righteousness, राजा king, कुलवताम् for men of good families, कुलम् family, राजा king alone, माता mother, पिताचैव father also, राजा king, नृणाम् for people, हितकरः one who renders welfare.
2::67::34::ततः for that reason, यमः lord of death, Yama, वैश्रवणः Vaisravana, शक्रः Indra, महाबलः  mighty, वरुणश्च Varuna, नरेन्द्रेण by the king, महता excellent, वृत्तेन with conduct विशेष्यन्ते are surpassed.
2::67::35::अहो how great, राजा a king, साध्वसाधुनी good and evil actions, विभजन् showing the distinction, लोके in the world, न भवेद्यदि if it were not to happen, इदम् this, तमः स्यात्  would be darkness, किञ्चन even a little, न प्रज्ञायेत could not have been known.
2::67::36::महाराजे when the great king, जीवत्यपि was alive also, वयम् we, सर्वे all, सागरः sea, वेलाम्  shore, प्राप्येव after reaching, तव your, वचनमेव words, नातिक्रमामहे never overstepped. 
2::67::37::द्विजवर्य O best of brahmins, सः you, वृत्तम् all that has happened, समीक्ष्य having considered, नृपं विना without a king, राज्यम् kingdom, अरण्यभूतम् like a forest, त्वमेव yourself, इह here, वदान्यम् generous, इक्ष्वाकु सुतम् born in the Ikshvaku race, कुमारम् son, नः for us, राजानम् as king, अभिषिञ्च consecrate him.
