2::67::1::The night stretched interminably in Ayodhya, which was filled with sobbing people  rendered cheerless by their lamentations. 
2::67::2::When the night finally ended and after the sunrise next day, the brahmins who perform royal investiture having been called and reached the assembly hall. 
2::67::3:: Markandeya, Maudgalya, Kasyapa, Katyayana, Gautama, Jabali of great renown   accompanied by ministers and brahmins approached Vasistha, the chief  priest of the king and expressed different opinions (on the investiture).
2::67::4:: While king Dasaratha died on account of grief over (separation from) his son and rejoined the five elements, the sorrowful night seemed like a hundred years for us. (commented the assembly of ministers).
2::67::5:: The great king has attained heaven, Rama has taken refuge in the forest and brilliant Lakshmana has also gone with Rama.
2::67::6:: Bharata and Satrughna, destroyers of enemies, are at the beautiful city of Rajagriha in the Kekaya kingdom, the palace of their maternal grandfather's palace.  
2::67::7::Therefore, let someone from the race of Ikshvakus be appointed king right now.  since without a king, the country will be destroyed.
2::67::8::In a country without a king, thunderous clouds garlanded by lightning would no longer water the earth with celestial showers.
2::67::9::Where there is no king, even a handful of seeds will not be sown (will not sprout). In a kingless kingdom, a son or a wife will not obey the father (head of the family).
2::67::10::In a kingdom without a king wealth cannot be preserved, no wife would like to stay (with her husband). There is one more cause for a great peril, that is, there is no place for truth in a country (where there is no king).
2::67::11::In a country where there is no king, no assemblies are convened by pleasure seeking people, nor do they build delightful gardens or sacred edifices. 
2::67::12::In a country without a king, selfcontrolled brahmins in charge of sacrificial ceremonies, wellversed in the study of Vedas and strict followers of  austerity will not function.
2::67::13:: In a country without a king wealthy brahmins, who have performed great sacrifices, do not offer abundance of gifts to the officiating priests.
2::67::14:: In a country without a king, celebrations of associations promoting the welfare of the country, actors and dancers in large numbers do not prosper. 
2::67::15::Where there is no king, those engaged in lawsuits will not succeed and those who are accustomed to storytelling will not entertain those who love to listen to stories.  
2::67::16::In a country without a king, young ladies adorned with golden ornaments no longer meet in the evening at the pleasure garden for sporting.
2::67::17:: In a country without a king, pleasureseeking men will not drive in the woods on swiftmoving chariots with women. 
2::67::18:: In a country without a king, wealthy people who live on farming and raising cattle cannot sleep safely in their homes with doors wide open.
2::67::19:: In a country without a king, young elephants of sixty years of age, their tusks adorned with bells no longer wander about on the highways.
2::67::20::In a country without a king, the sounds of the ceaseless discharge of arrows and practice of weapons, the clappings of the cord on the skin shield of shooters throwing the arrows are no longer heard.
2::67::21::In a country without a king merchants travelling long distances with several kinds of saleable goods cannot go safely on their way.
2::67::22::In a country where there is no king, an ascetic who (normally) moves alone, selfcontrolled and contemplating on the higher self no longer wanders or rests in the inn.
2::67::23::In a country without a king, there is no security of possessions and the army cannot withstand the  enemy in a battle.
2::67::24::In a country without a king, welldressed men are no longer enthusiastic to drive on excellent horses and on chariots.
2::67::25::In a country with no king people proficient in scriptures do not withdraw to the forests and (recreational) gardens for debates (on scriptures).
2::67::26:: In a country where there is no king, people who are disciplined in spiritual practices do not offer garlands of flowers, sweetmeats and alms while worshipping gods.
2::67::27:: In a country where there is no king, the princes, anointed with sandal paste and agaru, no longer look graceful like blosoming trees in spring time. 
2::67::28:: (The kingdom without a king) is like rivers without water, forests without vegetation and  cows without cowherds.  
2::67::29::The pennant is an identification for one's chariot. Smoke is a mark of identifying fire. All of us are recognised by the pennant (magnanimity) of the king and such a king has gone to heaven. 
2::67::30::In a country where there is no king, no one can own anything and, like fish, people devour one another ceaselessly.
2::67::31::Atheists, who disregard the bounds of morality and live freely dispelling doubts will tend to follow virtuous path out of fear when subjected to royal punishment.
2::67::32:: The king is the source for protecting the truth and morality of a country like the eye which perpetually watches the welfare of the body.     
2::67::33::The king is the protector of truth and righteousness, of men of good families. He is father, and mother. He alone renders welfare of the people. 
2::67::34::Hence, the king with his excellent conduct surpasses mighty Yama, Vaisravana, Indra and Varuna. 
2::67::35::If the king did not show the distinction between the good and evil actions, this world would have been enveloped by darkness. Nothing could have been seen. How great (is the king)?
2::67::36::Even while the great king was alive, we never defied your word like the ocean which does not overstep its shore.  
2::67::37::O Vasistha, the best of brahmins, considering all that has happened and knowing that a kingdom without a king is like a forest, you may consecrate a generous son from  the Ikshvaku race as our king.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्तषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyseventh sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
