2::11::1::कैकेयी Kaikeyi, मन्मथशरैः with the darts of Kamadeva, विद्धम् struck, कामवेगवशानुगम् overtaken by passion, तं पृथिवीपालम् to the ruler of earth (Dasaratha), दारुणम् dreadful, वचः words, उवाच said.
2::11::2::देव O king, केनचित् by any one, विप्रकृता offended, नास्मि I am not, न अवमानिता nor disregarded, तु but, मे my, कश्चित् certain, अभिप्रायः purpose, तम् that one, त्वया by you, कृतं इच्छामि you should fulfil.
2::11::3::त्वम् you, कर्तुम् to accomplish, इच्छसि यदि if you are inclined, प्रतिज्ञां प्रतिजानीष्व promise to fulfil, अथ thereafter, मया by me, यत् whatever, अभिप्रार्थितम् sought for, तत् that one, व्याहरिष्यामि I will tell you.
2::11::4::महातेजाः mighty, कामी steeped in passion, ईषत् a little, उत्स्मितः with a visible smile, शुचिस्मिताम् with a pure (bright) smile, तां कैकेयीम् to that Kaikeyi, मूर्धजेषु  her hair, हस्तेन with hand, संगृह्य holding (gently), उवाच said.
2::11::5::आवलिप्ते  woman swollen with pride, न जानासि do you not know?, मम to me, त्वत्तः more than you, प्रियतरः dearer, मनुजव्याघ्रात् other than the tiger (best) among men, रामात् than Rama, अन्यः other, मनुजः man, न विद्यते does not exist.
2::11::6::अजय्येन invincible one, मुख्येन chief (among men), जीवनार्हेण by one worthy to live, महात्मना broadminded, तेन राघवेण by that scion among the Raghus (Rama), शपे swear, मनसा in mind, यत् which, इच्छसि (you) wish, ब्रूहि tell.
2::11::7::कैकेयि Kaikeyi, यम् whom, अपश्यन् without seeing, अहम् I, मुहूर्तम् even for a moment, ध्रुवम्  this is certain, न जीवेयम् cannot live, तेन रामेण by such Rama, ते your, वचनक्रियाम् in accordance with your wish, शपे I swear.
2::11::8::कैकेयि Kaikeyi, आत्मना वा by myself, अन्यैः by others, आत्मजैश्च my sons, यम् whom,  मनुजर्षभम् best among men, वृणे I choose, तेन रामेण by that Rama, ते your, वचनक्रियाम्  to fulfil your wish, शपे swear.
2::11::9::भद्रे O gentle lady मे my, एतत् this, हृदयम् heart, अनुमृश्य having touched, उद्धरस्व save, कैकेयि O Kaikeyi, एतत् this, समीक्ष्य after considering, यत् which, साधु as good, मन्यसे you may consider, ब्रूहि you may tell.
2::11::10::आत्मनि  in yourself, बलम् power, जानन्ती you know fully, माम् me, शङ्कितुम् to doubt, न अर्हसि it does not behove you, सुकृतेनापि on my merits, ते to you, शपे I swear, तव your, प्रीतिम् pleasure, करिष्ये I shall do.
2::11::11::तदर्थमनाः  bent upon her interests, देवी queeni, आगतम् her mind has set upon, तम् अभिप्रायम् her wish, निर्माध्यस्थ्यात् with no alternate path, हर्षात् च rejoiced, दुर्वचम् unutterable, वचः words, बभाषे uttered.
2::11::12::तेन वाक्येन by those  words, संहृष्टा delighted, अभ्यागतम् suddenly struck, अन्तकमिव like death, महाघोरम् highly dreadful, आगतम् that has come to her mind, तम् अभिप्रायम् her wish, व्याजहार spoke.
2::11::13::साग्निपुरोगमाः with firegod in the forefront, त्रयस्त्रिंशद्देवाः thirtythree (crore) gods, क्रमेण successively, यथा like, शपसि your are swearing, मम my, वरम् boon, ददासि च are giving, तत् that, शृण्वन्तु listen.
2::11::14::चन्द्रादित्यौ Moon and Sun, नभः च एव and the sky also, ग्रहाः the planets, रात्र्यहनी night and day, दिशः the (ten) quarters, जगच्च the world, सगन्धर्वा with all gandharvas, सराक्षसा with all rakshasas, इयम् this, पृथिवी earth, निशाचराणि nightrangers, भूतानि all beings, गृहेषु in the houses, गृहदेवताः family deities, अन्यानि all other, यानि whosoever, भूतानि beings, तव your, भाषितम्  words of promise, जानीयुः let them know.
2::11::15::सत्यसन्ध: true to his vows, महातेजाः heroic, धर्मज्ञः knows the ways of righteousness, सुसमाहितः wellcomposed, एषः this (Dasaratha), मम my, वरम् boon, ददाति is giving, दैवताः gods, तत् that one, मे for my sake, शृण्वन्तु hear.
2::11::16::देवी queen, महेष्वासम् great archer, परिगृह्य having seized, अभिशस्य च having flattered, ततः परम् च afterwards, वरदम् conferer of boons, काममोहितम् infatuated, इदम् this word, उवाच said.
2::11::17::राजन् O king, पुरा long ago, तस्मिन् that, दैवासुरे between gods and asuras, रणे in the  war, वृत्तम् event, स्मर recollect, तत्र there, शत्रु: च enemy too, तव your, जीवितम् अन्तरा except your life, अच्यावयत् pulled down.
2::11::18::देव O king तत्र च there too, यत् since, त्वम् you, मया by me, समभिरक्षितः were rescued, ततः for that reason, जाग्रत्याः fully alert, यतमानायाः making efforts to protect you, मे to me,  वरौ two boons, प्राददाः you conferred.
2::11::19::पृथिवीपाल O protector of the earth, सत्यसङ्गर  one who is honest in keeping promises, देव O king तव your, सकाशे एव with, निक्षेपौ preserved as deposit (to be given in course of time), तौ those, दत्तौ given, वरौ तु boons, अहम् I, मृगयामि seeking.
2::11::20::तत् that, प्रतिश्रुत्य having vowed, मे my, वरम् boon, धर्मेण rightfully, न दास्यसि चेत् if you do not grant, त्वद्विमानिता disgraced by you, अद्यैव right away, जीवितम् life, प्रहास्यामि हि shall give up.
2::11::21::तदा then, कैकेय्या by Kaikeyi, वाङ्मात्रेण with words only, स्ववशे under the control, कृतः     caught, राजा च king also, मृगः इव like a deer, आत्मनः for his own, विनाशाय  for destruction, पाशम् trap, प्रचस्कन्द jumped into.
2::11::22::ततः परम् thereafter, काममोहितम् overcome by passion, वरदम् conferer of boons, इदम् this word, उवाच said, महीपते O lord of earth, देव my lord, तदा then, मे to me, त्वया by yourself, यौ वरौ those two boons, दत्तौ were given, तौ about them, अद्यैव तावत् right now, वक्ष्यामि I shall speak out , मे वचः my words, शृणु listen.
2::11::23::राघवस्य Rama's, अभिषेकसमारम्भः preparations for consecration, उपकल्पितः have been  made, अनेन अभिषेकेणैव with these materials for installation, मे my, भरतः Bharata, अभिषिच्यताम् shall be crowned.
2::11::24::तदा then, दैवासुरे युद्धे in the war between gods and asuras, प्रीतेन pleased, त्वया by you, देव Lord मे  to me, यः which, द्वितीय: second, वरः boon, दत्तः was given, तस्य for that, अयम् this, कालः  time, आगतः has come.
2::11::25::रामः Rama, नव पञ्च च वर्षाणि for fourteen (nine and five) years, दण्डकारण्यम् Dandaka forest, आश्रितः resorted to, चीराजिनजटाधारी clad in tattered (bark) and deer skin and wearing matted locks, तापसः like an ascetic, भवतु shall remain (in the forest.)
2::11::26::अद्य now, भरतः Bharata, अकण्टकम् without any thorns(rivals), यौवराज्यम् as princeregent, भजताम् let him enjoy, एषः this, मे my, परमः great, कामः desire, दत्तं वरमेव already granted boon, वृणे I am asking for, अद्य चैव now itself, वनम् to the forest, प्रयान्तं departing to the forest, राघवम् to the scion of the Raghus (Rama), पश्येयम् I shall see.
2::11::27::राजराजः king of kings, सः you are such, सत्यसङ्गरः भव  be true to your vows, कुलं च your race , शीलं च character, जन्म च birth, रक्ष हि protect, नृणाम् for men, परत्र in the other world, वासे for existence, सत्यवचः merits of truth, अनुत्तमम् no superior, हितम् welfare, तपोधनाः those having ascetism as wealth, sages, वदन्ति हि are saying.
