2::92::1:: ततः thereafter, कृतातिथ्यः having received the hospitality, सपरिच्छदः with his retinue, भरतः Bharata, तां रजनीम् that night, उष्य having spent, कामात् intention of, भरद्वाजम् Bharadwaja, अभिजगाम ह approached.
2::92::2::हुताग्निहोत्रः who had completed his firesacrifice, भरद्वाजः ऋषिः sage Bharadwaja, पुरुषव्याघ्रम् tiger among men, प्राञ्जलिम् with folded palms, आगतम् arrived, तं भरतम् to Bharata, प्रेक्ष्य having seen, अभ्यभाषत spoke.
2::92::3::अत्र here, अस्मद्विषये at our place, तव to you, रात्रिः night, सुखम् happily, गता कच्चित् hope you spent, हे अनघ O sinless one, आतिथ्ये in the matter of hospitality, ते जनः your people, समग्रः कच्चित् all well, मे शंस tell me. 
2::92::4:: भरतः Bharata, आश्रमात् from the hermitage, अभिनिष्क्रान्तम् emerging, उत्तमतेजसम् great power, तम् ऋषिम् that sage, अञ्जलिं कृत्वा with palms joined together, अभिप्रणम्य च and saluting him, उवाच said:
2::92::5::भगवन् O holy one, सामात्यः with my ministers, समग्रबलवाहनः with the entire army and animals, त्वया by you, बलवत् exceedingly, सर्वकामैः with all desires, तर्पितः gratified, सुखोषितः अस्मि passed pleasantly. 
2::92::6:: प्रेष्यान् अपि even the messengers, उपादाय including, सर्वे all of us, अपेतक्लमसन्तापाः freed from fatigue and heat, सुभिक्षाः wellnourished, सुप्रतिश्रयाः wellhoused, सुसुखोषिताः स्मः we passed (the night) happily
2::92::7:: भगवन् O venerable one, ऋषिसत्तमः O excellent of the ascetics, अहम् I, त्वाम् you, कामम् greatly, आमन्त्रये I take leave of you, भ्रातुः brother's, समीपम् to, प्रस्थितम् set out, मैत्रेण friendly, चक्षुषा with eye, ईक्षस्व you may consider.
2::92::8:: धर्मज्ञ O knower of righteous ways, धार्मिकस्य of the righteous, तस्य महात्मनः of that magnanimous one, आश्रमम् hermitage, आचक्ष्व tell me, कतमः which, मार्गः is the path  कियान् how far, इति च that one also, मे to me, शंस tell. 
2::92::9:: महातेजाः brilliant, महातपाः a great sage, भरद्वाजः Bharadwaja, इति thus, पृष्टः questioned, भ्रातृदर्शनलालसम् yearning to see his brother, भरतम् to Bharata, प्रत्युवाच replied.
2::92::10:: भरत O Bharata, अर्धतृतीयेषु three and a half, योजनेषु yojanas (one yojana is equivalent to eight miles), तत्र there, अजने lonely, वने forest, रम्यनिर्झरकाननः with charming streams and woodlands, चित्रकूटः Chitrakuta, गिरिः mountain (is there).
2::92::11::तस्य its, उत्तरं पार्श्वम् northern side, आसाद्य having reached, पुष्पितद्रुमसञ्चन्ना covered with flowering trees, रम्यपुष्पितकानना with lovely, blossoming woods, मन्दाकिनी नदी there is river Mandakini. 
2::92::12:: तत्सरितः that river, अनन्तरम् beyond, चित्रकूटः Chitrkuta, पर्वतः mountain, तयोः their, पर्णकुटी leafy hut, तात O dear child, तौ both of them, तत्र there, वसतः are living, ध्रुवम् this is certain. 
2::92::13::वाहिनीपते lord of the army, महाभाग O distinguished one, गजवाजिरथाकीर्णाम् consisting of elephants, horses and chariots, वाहिनीम् army, दक्षिणेनैव to its south, मार्गेण through the  path, सव्यदक्षिणमेव वा or towards southwest, वाहयस्व lead, ततः thereafter, राघवम् Rama, द्रक्षयसि you will see.
2::92::14::इति thus, प्रयाणम् about journey, श्रुत्वा having heard, यानार्हाः chariots worthy of them, राजराजस्य king of kings, Dasaratha's, योषितः wives, यानानि carriages, हित्वा leaving, ब्राह्मणम् that brahmin, पर्यवारयन् stood around.
2::92::15:: तत्र among them, कृशा emaciated, दीना desolate, कौसल्या Kausalya, वेपमाना trembling, मुनेः sage's, चरणौ feet, सुमित्रया देव्या सह along with Sumitra, जग्राह grasped.
2::92::16::असमृद्धेन with unfulfilled, कामेन with desire, सर्वलोकस्य for all the worlds, गर्हिता despised, कैकेयी Kaikeyi, सव्यपत्रपा overcome with shame, तस्य his, चरणौ feet, जग्राह grasped.
2::92::17::तदा then, भगवन्तम् divine, तं महामुनिम् that great ascetic, प्रदक्षिणं आगम्य reverently circumambulated, दीनमनाः with a sad heart, भरतस्य from Bharata, अदूरादेव not far away, तस्थौ stood. 
2::92::18::ततः thereafter, दृढव्रतः firm in vows, भरद्वाजः Bharadwaja, भरतम् Bharata, पप्रच्छ enquired, राघव O Bharata, तव your, मात्रूणाम् mothers, विशेषम् individually, ज्ञातुम् to know, इच्छामि want desiring. 
2::92::19:: धीमता by the sagacious, भरद्वाजेन by Bharadwaja, एवम् thus, उक्तः asked, वचनकोविदः proficient in speech, भरतः Bharata, प्राञ्जलि: भूत्वा with palms joined together in reverence, वाक्यम् words, उवाच said. 
2::92::20:: भगवन् O venerable one, दीनाम् desolate, शोकानशनकर्शिताम् emaciated due to grief and fasting, पितुः father's, महिषीम् principal queen, देवतामिव resembling a goddess, याम् इमाम्   देवीम् that this queen, पश्यसि you are seeing, एषा she, कौसल्या is Kausalya, अदितिः Aditi,  धातारं यथा like Dhata, सिंहविक्रान्तगामिनम् walking with the powerful stride of a lion, पुरुषव्याघ्रम् tiger among men, तं रामम् that Rama, सुषुवे gave birth. 
2::92::21:: या एषा this woman, दुर्मनाः plunged in grief, वनान्तरे in the midst of the forest, शीर्णपुष्पा with blossoms withered, कर्णिकारस्य of the karnikara tree, शाखेव like a branch, अस्याः this Kausalya's, वामभुजम् left arm, श्लिष्टा leaning, तिष्ठति standing, कुमारौ two princes, देववर्णिनौ equal to gods in beauty, वीरौ heroes, सत्यपराक्रमौ possessing no vain prowess, लक्षणशत्रुघ्नौ  Lakshmana and Satrughna, उभौ both, एतस्या देव्या: this queen's, सुतौ sons.
2::92::22::यस्याः कृते on whose account, नरव्याघ्रौ best of men (Rama and Lakshmana), इतः from here, जीवनाशम् destruction of life, गतौ obtained, राजा दशरथः king Dasaratha, पुत्रविहीनश्च deprived of his son, स्वर्गम् heaven, गतः attained, आत्मन: mine, महत् great, व्यसनम्  calamity, यतोमूलम् the root cause of, पश्यामि I see, क्रोधानाम् irascible, अकृतप्रज्ञाम् is not discerning, दृप्ताम् proud, सुभगमानिनीम् considers herself beautiful, ऐश्वर्यकामाम् ambitious of wealth, अनार्याम् ignoble, आर्यरूपिणीम् in the guise of a noble woman, एताम् she, नृशंसाम् wicked, पापनिश्चयाम् intent on sinful acts, मम my, मातरम् mother, कैकेयीम् Kaikeyi, विद्धि you may know. 
2::92::23:: ताम्राक्षः with reddened eyes, नरशार्दूलः tiger among men, सः that Bharata, बाष्पगद्गदया in a voice choked with tears, गिरा with words, इति thus,उक्त्वा having said, कृद्धः angry, श्वसन् sighing, नागः इव like a king cobra, निश्स्वास heaved sighs.
2::92::24::महाबुद्धि: wise, महर्षिः great sage Maharshi, भरद्वाजः Bharadwaja, तथा thus, ब्रुवन्तम्      speaking, तं भरतम् to that Bharata, अर्थवत् significant, इदं वचनम् these words, प्रत्युवाच replied.
2::92::25:: भरत O Bharata, कैकेयी Kaikeyi, त्वया by you, दोषेण with any fault, न अवगन्तव्या should not be imputed, एतत् this, रामप्रव्राजनम् banishment of Rama, सुखोदर्कम् of great felicity, भविष्यति हि will become. 
2::92::26:: इह now, रामप्रव्राजनात् by banishing Rama, देवानाम् of gods, दानवानां च of demous, भावितात्मनाम् of purified souls, ऋषीणां rishis', हितमेव also welfare, भविष्यद्धि shall become.
2::92::27::भरतः Bharata, एनम् him, अभिवाद्य having paid obeisance, संसिद्धः getting ready for the journey, प्रदक्षिणं च कृत्वा having circumambulated, आमन्त्र्य having taken leave of him, युज्यताम् इति Be harnessed, सैन्यम् the army, अचोदयत् urged. 
2::92::28:: ततः then, बहुविधः different types, जनः people, प्रयाणार्थी wishing to proceed, दिव्यान् excellent, हेमपरिष्कृतान् decorated with gold, युक्तान् harnessed, वाजिरथान् horsechariots, अध्यारोहत् mounted. 
2::92::29::हेमकक्ष्याः with golden girths, पताकिनः with pennants, गजकन्याः female elephants, गजाश्चैव also male elephants, घर्मान्ते at the close of summer, जीमूताः इव like thunderclouds, सघोषाः with sounds, सम्प्रतस्थिरे set forth. 
2::92::30::महन्ति च large ones, लघूनि च small ones, विविधानि of various kinds, सुमहार्हाणि costly, यानानि had carriages, प्रययुः set forth, पदातयः footsoldiers, पादैरेव set out on foot it self.
2::92::31:: अथ thereafter, कौसल्याप्रमुखाः headed by Kausalya, स्त्रियः women, रामदर्शनकाङ्क्षिण्यः eager to see Rama, मुदिताः delightfully, तदा then, यानप्रवेकैः in distinguished carriages, प्रययुः went. 
2::92::32:: श्रीमान् majestic, भरतः Bharata, चन्द्रार्कतरुणाभासाम् with the splendour of the Sun and the Moon, निर्युक्ताम् kept ready, शुभाम् auspicious, शिबिकाम् palanquin, आस्थाय having got in, सपरिच्छदः with retinue, प्रययौ proceeded. 
2::92::33:: गजवाजिरथाकुला teeming with elephants, horses and chariots, सा महासेना that vast army, उत्थितः that has arisen, महामेघ इव like a lofty cloud, दक्षिणां दिशम् southward, आवृत्य  having spread, मृगपक्षिभिः with birds and beasts, जुष्टानि visited, वनानि forests, व्यतिक्रम्य traversing, गङ्गाया: river Ganga's, परवेलायाम् on the other side, गिरिष्वपि through mountains also, नदीषु च and streams, प्रयाता proceeded. 
2::92::34:: सम्प्रहृष्टद्विपवाजियोधा with soldiers, elephants and horses in high spirits, मृगपक्षिसङ्घान् flocks of birds and beasts, वित्रासयन्ती frightening, भरतस्य Bharata's, सा सेना that army, तत्र there, तत् that, महत् great, वनम् forest, प्रतिगाहमाना while entering, रराज looked splendid.  
