2::76::1:: Vasistha, the most eloquent and the best of ascetics said to Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi who was tormented with grief:
2::76::2::O prince of great renown, may God bless you It is not proper on your part to grieve. It is time to perform the funeral rites of the king in the best way possible.
2::76::3:: On hearing the words of Vasistha, dutiful Bharata regained his steadiness and engaged in the performance of the funeral rites.
2::76::4::The mortal remains of king Dasaratha, protector of the earth, was taken out of the oil container and placed on the floor. His pale, yellow face appeared as if he was asleep. Thereafter it was laid upon a magnificent couch adorned with every kind of gem. On seeing Dasaratha in that state  Bharata lamented in extreme distress.
2::76::5::What have you done, O king, between my absence and my arrival? You have banished the righteous Rama and the valiant Lakshmana.
2::76::6:: O great king Where will you go leaving me who is bewailing for having been left by Rama, the lion among men and a man of pious deeds?
2::76::7::O king O father you have gone to heaven and Rama has taken shelter in the forest now. Who will take care of the welfare and security of your city?
2::76::8::O king bereft of you, the earth (kingdom) is widowed and has lost its radiance. The city appears to me like a moonless night.
2::76::9::To Bharata who was thus lamenting with a dejected mind, the great ascetic Vasistha once again said:
2::76::10::O mightyarmed prince, the funeral rites that are required to be performed for the departed king ought to be done carefully without any shortcomings.
2::76::11::Bharata said, 'Be it so' in obedience to Vasistha, who hastened up the learned Vedic scholars, family priests and preceptors to perform various rites. 
2::76::12::The sacrificial fire of the king has been put outside the firesanctuary in accordance with the ritual precepts and were withdrawn by the attendants and priests wellversed in Vedic lore.
2::76::13::Thereafter the attendants raised the mortal remains of the deceased king onto a litter, with dejected minds, throats choked with tears and carried him away. 
2::76::14::The people went ahead of the king's body strewing on the way gold of brilliant colour and different kinds of garments.
2::76::15:: In this way others brought sandal, agaru and fragrant gum gugul, the resin of balsa tree and woods of sarala, padmaka and devadaru and built a pyre and strew many kinds of fragrant substances on it. Thereafter the priests laid the mortal remains of the king in the centre of the pyre.
2::76::16::Then the priests offering oblations to the king's fire, intoned prayers. The reciters of Sama Veda sang the hymns in accordance with the sacred scriptures.
2::76::17::Then in accordance with their rank and surrounded by aged guards, the wives of  king Dasaratha departed for that place from the city in palanquins and other carriages.
2::76::18::Then the priests and other women led by Kausalya who was consumed with grief circumambulated the pyre in the reverse direction as the king's body was engulfed by flames.
2::76::19::At that time, piteous cries of distressed women in their thousands like the piercing cries of female kraunchas (birds) were heard.
2::76::20::Thereafter, the courtesans weeping uncontrollably and, lamenting again and again, alighted from carriages on the bank of the river Sarayu. 
2::76::21::The wives of the king, counsellors and priests along with Bharata offered waterlibation and entered the city with tearful eyes. They spent the tenday  mourning period sleeping on the ground (floor) in great grief.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षटसप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventysixth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
