2::50::1::लक्ष्मणपूर्वजः Lakshmana's elder brother, धीमान् sagacious, रम्यान् beautiful, विशालान् vast, कोसलान् kingdom of Kosala, यात्वा  gone beyond, अयोध्याभिमुखः facing Ayodhya, प्राञ्जलिः with folded hands, वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवीत् spoke. 
2::50::2::काकुत्स्थपरिपालिते a city ruled by the Kakutsthas, पुरीश्रेष्ठे best among cities, त्वाम् you, यानि दैवतानि all those gods, वसन्ति inhabiting, पालयन्ति च are guarding  you also, आपृच्छे I am taking leave.
2::50::3::जगतीपतेः lord of the world (king Dasaratha), अनृणः free from debt, निवृत्तवनवासः having completed forest life, मात्रा च with mother, पित्रा च with father, सङ्गतः reunited, त्वाम्  you, पुनः again, द्रक्ष्यामि will see.
2::50::4::ततः then, अश्रुपूर्णमुखः face filled with tears, रुधिरताम्राक्षः eyes copperred, दीनः dejected, दक्षिणम् right, भुजम् arm, उद्यम्य having raised, जानपदम् pertaining to villages, जनम् people, अब्रवीत् said.
2::50::5::मयि in me, यथार्हम् appropriately, वः to you, दया चैव kindness, अनुक्रोशः compassion, कृतः  has been done, दुःखस्य of suffering, चिरम् for long, पापीयः is sinful, अर्थसिद्धये to discharge your duties, गम्यताम् go.
2::50::6::ते नराः those people, महात्मानम् highsouled, अभिवाद्य having paid respect, प्रदक्षिणं चापि circumambulation, कृत्वा having made, घोरम् frightfully, विलपन्तः  lamenting, क्वचित् क्वचित् hither and thither, व्यतिष्ठन्त stood (looking at him).
2::50::7::अतृप्तानाम् not satisfied, तेषाम् them, तथा in that manner, विलपताम् lamenting, राघवः Rama, क्षणदामुखे at nightfall, अर्कः the Sun, यथा like that, अचक्षुर्विषयम् out of sight, प्रायात् went.
2::50::8::ततः then, पुरुषव्याघ्रः tiger (best) among men (Rama), धान्यधनोपेतान् rich in wealth and foodgrain, दानशीलजनान् with charitable people, शिवान् auspicious, अकुतश्चिद्भयान् free from fear, रम्यान् charming, चैत्ययूपसमावृतान् surrounded by sacrificial altars and posts, उद्यानाम्रवनोपेतान् filled with pleasure gardens and mango groves, सम्पन्नसलिलाशयान् tanks filled with water, तुष्टपुष्टजनाकीर्णान् full of contented and wellnourished people, गोकुलाकुलसेवितान् with herds of cattle, नरेन्द्राणाम् for kings, लक्षणीयान् fit to be seen, ब्रह्मघोषाभिनादितान् echoed with the sounds of Vedic recitations, कोसलान् Kosala kingdom, रथेन by the chariot, अत्यवर्तत crossed over.
2::50::9::धृतिमताम् among those endowed with fortitude, वरः best, मुदितम् pleased, स्फीतम्  prosperous, रम्योद्यानसमाकुलम् full of ravishing gardens, नरेन्द्राणाम् of kings, भोग्यम् fit to be enjoyed, राज्यम् of that kingdom, मध्येन in its middle, ययौ went.
2::50::10::तत्र there, राघवः Rama, त्रिपथगाम् flowing in three worlds, रम्याम् beautiful, शिवतोयाम् sacred waters, आशैवलाम् free from moss, पुण्याम् holy, ऋषिसेविताम्  worshipped by sages, गङ्गाम् Ganga, ददर्श saw.
2::50::11::अविदूरस्थैः by those situated not far away, श्रीमद्भिः by the graceful, आश्रमैः by hermitages, समलङ्कृताम् adorned with, काले at times, हृष्टाभिः delightful, अप्सरोभिः by nymphs, सेविताम्भोह्रदाम् sport in her lakes, शिवाम् auspicious  (Ganga).
2::50::12::देवदानवगन्धर्वैः by devatas, danavas, and gandharvas, किन्नरैः by kinneras, उपशोभिताम्  looking splendid, नानागन्धर्वपत्नीभिः by wives of several gandharvas, सततम् always, सेविताम्, inhabited, शिवाम् auspicious(Ganga).
2::50::13::देवाऽऽक्रीडशताकीर्णां filled with hundreds of hills serving as sporting places for devatas देवोद्यानशतायुताम् hundreds of pleasuregardens for devatas, देवार्थम् for the sake of devatas, आकाशगमाम् flowing through heaven, देवपद्मिनीम् as Devapadmini, where celestial lotuses grow, विख्याताम् is wellknown. 
2::50::14::जलाघाताट्टहासोग्राम् ferocious with the sound of dashing waters resembling loud laughter, फेननिर्मलहासिनीम् with the sparkling smile of foam, क्वचित् at some places, वेणीकृतजलाम्  with waters flowing straight like a maiden's braid, क्वचित् at some places, आवर्तशोभिताम् shining with whirlpools.
2::50::15::क्वचित् at places, स्तिमितगम्भीराम् was deep and quiet, क्वचित् at places, वेगजलाकुलाम् perturbed due to fastflowing waters, क्वचित् at places, गम्भीरनिर्घोषाम् making majestic sound, क्वचित् at some place, भैरवनिस्वनाम् makes dreadful sounds.
2::50::16::देवसङ्घाप्लुतजलाम् in the waters of which hosts of celestials take ablutions, निर्मलोत्पलशोभिताम् decked with pure blue lilies, क्वचित् at some places, अभोगपुलिनाम् with curved banks, क्वचित् at some places, निर्मलवालुकाम् white sands.
2::50::17::हंससारससङ्घुष्टाम् reverberating with cries of swans and cranes, चक्रवाकोपकूजिताम् filled with cries of chakravakas (ruddy geese), सदामदैः विहगैः always filled with passionate birds, अभिसन्नादितान्तराम् filled with sounds at intervals.
2::50::18::क्वचित् at some places,तीररुहैः grown on the banks,वृक्षैः with trees, मालाभिरिव like  garlands,शोभिताम् decorated, क्वचित् at some places, फुल्लोत्पलच्छन्नाम् covered with fulblown waterlilies, क्वचित् at some places, पद्मवनाकुलाम् spread with multitudes of lotuses. 
2::50::19::क्वचित् at some places, कुमुदषण्डैश्च with hosts of waterlilies,  कुड्मलैः halfblown flowers, उपशोभिताम् adorned, नानापुष्परजोध्वस्ताम् pollen from different kinds of flowers, क्वचित् in some places, समदाम् इव as if intoxicated with passion.
2::50::20::व्यपेतमलसङ्घाताम् cleansed of heaps of impurities, मणिनिर्मलदर्शनाम् appearing like a transparent gem, दिशागजैः by the elephants gaurding the quarters, मत्तैश्च by intoxicated ones, वनगजैः wild elephants, देवोपवाहैः by those suitable for carrying gods,  वरवारणैः with excellent elephants, मुहुः repeatedly, सन्नादितवनान्तराम् resounding in the interiors of the forest.
2::50::21::फलैः with fruits, पुष्पैः with flowers, किसलयैः with tender leaves or shoots, गुल्मैः with shrubs, तथा similarly, द्विजैः with birds, वृताम् encompassed, भूषणोत्तमैः with excellent ornaments, यत्नेन carefully, भूषिताम् decorated, प्रमदामिव like a woman,  शिंशुमारैश्च small whales, नक्रैश्च with crocodiles, भुजङ्गैश्च with serpents, निषेविताम् is served.
2::50::22::महाबाहुः mightyarmed, विष्णुपादच्युताम् dropped from the feet of lord Visnu, दिव्याम् divine, अपापाम् sinless, पापनाशिनीम् destroyer of sins, सागरतेजसा due to the effulgence (penance) of Sagara's son (Bhagiratha), शङ्कर जटाजूटात् from the matted hair of lord Siva, भ्रष्टाम् dropped, समुद्रमहिषीम् consort of the Ocean, सारसक्रौञ्चनादिताम् echoed with the cries of kraunchas and herons, तां गङ्गाम् that Ganga, शृङ्गिबेरपुरं प्रति towards Srngiberapura, आससाद reached.
2::50::23::महारथः great chariotwarrior, ऊर्मिकलिलावर्ताम् river full of tumultuous waves with  whirlpools, ताम् that, अन्ववेक्ष्य on beholding, सूतम् charioteer, सुमन्त्रम् Sumantra, अब्रवीत् said, अद्य today, अत्रैव here itself, वसामहे will spend.
2::50::24::सारथे O charioteer, नद्याः river's, अविदूरात् not far from, बहुपुष्पप्रवालवान् having many flowers and budding leaves, सुमहान् very large, अयम् this, इङ्गुदीवृक्षः Ingudi tree, अत्रैव here itself, वसामः shall stay.
2::50::25::देवदानवगन्धर्वमृगमानुषपक्षिणाम् for devas, danavas, gandharvas, beasts, serpents, men and birds, शिवाम् auspicious one, सम्मान्यसलिलाम् a river of venerable (holy) waters, सरितां श्रेष्ठाम्  best among rivers, द्रक्ष्यामः we shall see.
2::50::26::लक्ष्मणश्च Lakshmana, सुमन्त्रश्च Sumantra, राघवम् Rama, बाढमित्येव 'Be it so', उक्त्वा   saying, तदा then, हयैः with horses, तम् that, इङ्गुदीवृक्षम् ingudi tree, उपययतुः both approached. 
2::50::27::इक्ष्वाकुनन्दनः the delight of the Ikshvakus, रामः Rama, रम्यम् beautiful, तं वृक्षम् that tree, अभियाय having reached, सभार्यः with his consort, सहलक्ष्मणः with Lakshmana, तस्मात्  from that, रथात् chariot, अवातरत् alighted.
2::50::28::सुमन्त्रोऽपि Sumantra also, अस्मात् from that chariot, अवतीर्य having alighted, हयोत्तमान् the best of horses, मोचयित्वा having unyoked, कृताञ्जलिः with folded palms, वृक्षमूलगतम् sitting at the foot of the tree, रामम् Rama, उपतस्थे stood near.
2::50::29::तत्र there, रामस्य to Rama, आत्मसमः like his own self, सखा friend, निषादजात्यः hunter by  race, बलवान् powerful, स्थपतिश्चेति lord of nishada tribe, विश्रुतः wellknown, गुहो नाम Guha by name, राजा king.
2::50::30::सः he, पुरुषव्याघ्रम् (best) among men, रामम् Rama, विषयम् to his region, आगतम् having arrived, शृत्वा having heard, वृध्दै: by the aged, अमात्यैः by the ministers, ज्ञातिभिश्च by the people of his clan, परिवृतः surrounded by, अभ्युपागतः approached him.
2::50::31::ततः then, उपस्थितम् approaching, निषादाधिपतिं king of the nishadas, दूरात् from a distance, दृष्ट्वा having seen, सौमित्रिणा सह along with Lakshmana, सः रामः that Rama, गुहेन with Guha, समागच्छत् went forward.
2::50::32::आर्तः in anguish, गुहः Guha, तं राघवम् to Rama, सम्परिष्वज्य having embraced, अब्रवीत्  said, राम O Rama, ते to you, अयोध्या Ayodhya, यथा as how,  इयम् this city, तथा like that, ते to you, किम् what, करवाणि shall I do?, महाबाहो O mightyarmed one, ईदृशम् such, प्रियम्  beloved, अतिथिम् guest, कः who, प्राप्स्यति will get.
2::50::33::ततः thereafter, पृथग्विधम् various kinds of, गुणवत् of good quality, अन्नाद्यम् rice and other eatables, उपादाय having brought, क्षिप्रम् quickly, अर्घ्यं च drinks also, उपानयत् he brought, इदम् वाक्यं च these words, उवाच ह also spoke.
2::50::34::महाबाहो O mightyarmed one, ते to you, स्वागतम् welcome, अखिला entire, इयं मही this land, तव is yours, वयम् we, प्रेष्याः are attendants, भवान् you, भर्ता master, नः for us, राज्यम् this kingdom, साधु worthy of, प्रशाधि rule.
2::50::35::भक्ष्यम् food to be eaten by biting, भोज्यम् food to be eaten by chewing, पेयम् food fit for drinking, लेह्यं च food fit for licking, मुख्यानि excellent, शयनानि beds, ते for you,  वाजिनाम् for horses, खादनं च also fodder, इदम् here, उपस्थितम् awaits.
2::50::36::एवम् in this way, ब्रुवाणम् speaking, गुहम् to Guha, राघवः Rama, प्रत्युवाच ह replied, वयम् we, सर्वथा in every way, भवता by you, पद्भ्याम् on foot, अभिगमाच्चैव coming to meet  us, स्नेहसन्दर्शनने च showing your friendliness, अर्चिताश्चैव we have been worshipped,  हृष्टाश्च also pleased.
2::50::37::पीनाभ्याम् strong, भुजाभ्याम् with his arms, साधु tightly, पीडयन् pressing together, वाक्यम् words, अब्रवीत् said, गुह O Guha, दिष्ट्या luckily, सह बान्धवै: with all relations, अरोगम् hale and hearty, त्वाम् you, पश्यामि am seeing, ते your, राष्ट्रे kingdom, मित्रेषु in friends, धनेषु च wealth also, अपि कुशलम् (hope) all is well.
2::50::38::भवता by you, प्रीत्या with affection, इदम् now, यत् किञ्चित् whatever, समुकल्पितम् has been arranged, तत् सर्वम् all that, अनुजानामि I am accepting (giving you back), प्रतिग्रहे in acceptance, न वर्ते हि unable.
2::50::39::माम् me, कुशचीराजिनधरम् wearing garments made of bark, kusa grass and antelope skin, फलमूलाशिनम् susbsisting on fruits and roots, धर्मे in righteousness, प्रणिहितम् initiated, वनगोचरम् wandering in the forest, तापसम् like an ascetic, विद्धि you may know.
2::50::40::अहम् I, अश्वानाम् for horses, खादनेन with fodder, अर्थी I am a seeker, अन्येन by other thing, केनचित् with any one, न not, अत्र here, एतावता to this extent, भवता by you, सुपूजितः wellhonoured, भविष्यामि shall become.
2::50::41::एते these horses, मे पितुः my father's, दशरथस्य राज्ञः king Dasaratha's, दयिताः liked, सुविहितैः welltended, एतैः by these, अश्वैः with horses, अहम् I, अर्चितः worshipped,  भविष्यामि shall become.
2::50::42::सः that, गुहः Guha, तत्रैव there itself, पुरुषान् men, अश्वानाम् for the horses, प्रतिपानं च liquids like water, खादनं चैव forage, त्वरितम् quickly, दीयतामिति be given, अन्वशात् ordered.
2::50::43::ततः then, चीरोत्तरासङ्ग: upper robe, पश्चिमां सन्ध्याम् Sandhya,  अन्वास्य offering oblations, लक्ष्मणेन by Lakshmana, स्वयम् himself, आहृतम् which has been brought, जलमेव water only, भोज्यम् as food, आददे partook.
2::50::44::लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, भूमौ on the ground, शयानस्य for sleeping, सभार्यस्य with his consort, तस्य his, पादौ feet, प्रक्षाल्य having washed, ततः then, अभ्येत्य having gone towards, वृक्षम् tree, उपाश्रितः took refuge, तस्थौ he stood.    
2::50::45::गुहोऽपि Guha also, सूतेन सह along with the charioteer, सौमित्रिम् to Lakshmana, अनुभाषयन् while talking, ततः then, धनुर्धरः bow in hand, अप्रमत्तः by being vigilant, रामम् about Rama, अन्वजाग्रत् kept awake.
2::50::46::ततः then, अदृष्टदुःखस्य one who never experienced troubles, सुखोचितस्य used to comforts, धीमतः sagacious, यशस्विनः illustrious, महात्मनः magnanimous, तदा then, तथा like that, शयानस्य lying down, अस्य दाशरथेः for this son of Dasaratha (Rama), सा that, शर्वरी  night, चिरेण as of long duration, व्यतीयाय passed.
