2::22::1::The selfpossessed Rama held his composure and approached his beloved, intimate brother Lakshmana who was (looking) miserable with his mental agony. To him, who was hissing like a king cobra, he said:
2::22::2::The selfpossessed Rama held his composure and approached his beloved, intimate brother Lakshmana who was (looking) miserable with his mental agony. To him, who was hissing like a king cobra, he said:
2::22::3:: Restrain your anger and sorrow. Dismiss this humiliation (from the mind). Achieve great happiness through fortitude. Remove whatever preparations have been made for the purpose of (my) consecration today, and act quickly so that there is no obstacle. 
2::22::4::O Lakshmana the same enthusiasm with which preparations for my consecration were made be shown for the cessation of those arrangements.  
2::22::5::Act in such a way that our mother (Kaikeyi), whose heart ached due to my consecration should not entertain any doubt.    
2::22::6:: Even for a moment, O Lakshmana I am not inclined to ignore her sorrow caused by the apprehension in her mind (about the possibility of Rama's coronation).
2::22::7:: I do not remember to have done anything any time with a motive or without understanding which might have caused even a little displeasure to father or mothers.
2::22::8::Let my father who is always truthful, who is really valiant, who is always striving for truth and who is afraid of the next world, be fearless. 
2::22::9::If the preparations for the consecration are not withdrawn, my father will suffer mental agony for the fear that his word has not come true and his agony will torment me.
2::22::10::Therefore, O Lakshmana I want the arrangement for coronation withdrawn before I proceed to the forest from here itself.
2::22::11:: Immediately after my departure to the forest, the king's (Kekaya's) daughter having accomplished her objective, will enthrone Bharata without any distraction.
2::22::12:: Kaikeyi will attain peace of mind only after my departure to the forest in tattered clothes, an antelope skin and a crown of matted locks.
2::22::13::With wellcomposed mind this decision has been taken. I do not like to inflict pain (on Dasaratha or Kaikeyi). I shall, therefore, depart to the forest without delay.
2::22::14::If the award of the kingdom to me is revoked, O Lakshmana, and if I am banished in this manner, see, it is destiny. 
2::22::15::If this thought and my misfortune were not caused in Kaikeyi by destiny, how could she muster such determination to inflict pain on me?
2::22::16::You know, O gentle Lakshmana that never in the past had I any feeling of  distinction amongst my mothers. And Kaikeyi never differentiated between me and her son.
2::22::17::I do not find any reason other than destiny for the cruel and brutal words spoken by Kaikeyi with the objective of preventing my coronation and exiling me.
2::22::18:: If destiny is not the cause behind this, how could Kaikeyi who is gifted with virtues and a noble nature speak such painful words to me before her husband, like an ordinary woman?
2::22::19::Inconceivable is the power of destiny. Its impact on all beings cannot be averted. That  an adversity has befallen me and Kaikeyi is (therefore) evident.
2::22::20::O Lakshmana which mortal has the power to fight with destiny the grip of which can be comprehended  by following its course only through its effect and nowhere else. 
2::22::21:: Happiness or misery, fear or anger, gain or loss, birth or death, and all such things  are surely the acts of destiny.
2::22::22::Even rishis with severe austerities are tormented by destiny and are swerved from  their observances because of anger and passion. 
2::22::23:: Any unanticipated and sudden hindrance to the action undertaken shall be deemed to be the act of destiny.
2::22::24::Even though my consecration was thwarted, there is no feeling of sadness in me. In fact I controlled my mind by my intellect. 
2::22::25::Therefore, be free from grief like me and revoke all the arrangements made for the consecration ceremony immediately. 
2::22::26::With these very pots (of holy water) brought for the purpose of consecration, O Lakshmana I shall take bath at the time of taking vow for practising penance.
2::22::27:: Or else, for me what is the use of these pots of holy water which are the king's property? The water drawn with my own hands will be made use of for my religious bath.
2::22::28:: Do not grieve, O Lakshmana, over the loss of the kingdom. Living in exile is more glorious than running the kingdom.
2::22::29::O Lakshmana our younger mother (Kaikeyi) cannot be blamed for her obstruction to my coronation. Overpowered by destiny, she is speaking such unpleasant words. This you know is the impact of destiny.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्वाविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentysecond sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
