2::56::1::अथ thereafter, रघुनन्दन: Delight of the Raghus (Rama), रात्र्याम् night, अतीतायाम् had passed, अनन्तरम् then, अवसुप्तम् sleeping, लक्ष्मणम् Lakshmana, शनै: gently, प्रबोधयामास awakened.
2::56::2::सौमित्रे  Saumitri (son of Sumitra), वल्गु sweet, व्याहरताम् singing, वन्यानाम् of the sylvan birds, स्वनम् voices, श्रुणु you may listen, परन्तप O tormentor of enemies, प्रस्थानस्य  to set out, काल: time, सम्प्रतिष्ठामहे we shall set out.
2::56::3::सुप्त: one asleep, स: लक्ष्मण: that Lakshmana, समये in time, भ्रात्रा by his brother, प्रतिबोधित: awakened, निद्रां च sleep, तन्द्रीं च and drowsiness, पथि during journey, प्रसक्तम् associated with, श्रमं च fatigue, जहौ cast off.
2::56::4::तत: then, ते सर्वे they all, उत्थाय rising, नद्या: river's, शिवम् auspicious, जलम् water, स्पृष्ट्वा having touched, ऋषिणा by the sage (Bharadwaja), आदिष्टम् directed, तम् that, चित्रकूटस्य of Chitrakuta, पन्थानम् path, ययु: went.
2::56::5::तत: then, काले at the proper time, सौमित्रिणा सह along with Lakshmana, सम्प्रस्थित:  setting out, राम: Rama, कमलपत्राक्षीम् eyes like lotus petals, सीताम् addressing Sita, इदं वचनम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::56::6::वैदेहि O daughter of Videha (Sita), शिशिरात्यये at the end of winter, सर्वत: all over, पुष्पितान् in full bloom, आदीप्तानिव as if illuminated, स्त्वै: by their own, पुष्पै: flowers, मालिन: garland, किंशुकान् नगान् Kimsuka trees, पश्य see. 
2::56::7::फुल्लान् in full bloom, फलपत्रै: with fruits and leaves, अवनतान् bent low, नरै: by people, अनुपसेवितान् not enjoyed, भल्लातकान् bhallataka trees, पश्य see, नूनम् surely, जीवितुम् to reside, शक्ष्याम able.
2::56::8::लक्ष्मण O Lakshmana, नगे नगे in every tree, मधुकारीभि: by bees, सम्भृतानि assembled, द्रोणप्रमाणानि of the size of wooden vessels, लम्बमानानि hanging down, मधूनि honey, पश्य see. 
2::56::9::पुष्पसंस्तरसङ्कटे on the ground strewn with fallen flowers, रमणीये in a delightful, वनोद्धेशे in the forest region, एष: this, नत्यूह: natyuha (a type of cuckoo), क्रोशति is screaming, तम् that bird, शिखी peacock, प्रतिकूजति responding with its screaming.
2::56::10::मातङ्गयूथानुसृतं followed by the herds of elephants, पक्षिसंङ्घानुनादितम् with flocks of singing birds, प्रवृद्धशिखरम् with very towering peaks, इदम् this, गिरिम् mountain, पश्य see.
2::56::11::तात O dear, समभूमितले on the even ground, बहुभि: by several, द्रुमैः by trees, आवृते covered with, पुण्ये sacred, चित्रकूटस्य Chitrakuta's, कानने in the forest, रंस्यामहे we will enjoy.
2::56::12::तत: then, सीतयासह with Sita, पादचारेण walking on foot, गच्छन्तौ going, तौ both (Rama and Lakshmana), रम्यम् beautiful, मनोरमम् delightful, चित्रकूटं शैलम् Chitrakuta mountain, आसेदतुः reached.
2::56::13::नानापक्षिगणायुतम् filled with various kinds of birds, बहुमूलफलम् with varieties of roots and fruits, रम्यम् enchanting, सम्पन्नम् rich, सरसोदकम् of tasty water, तं पर्वतम् that mountain, आसाद्य having reached, (Rama said).
2::56::14::सौम्य O gentle one, मनोज्ञ: pleasing to the heart, नानादृमलतायुत: with various kinds of trees and creepers, बहुमूलफल: with many roots and fruits, रम्य: beautiful, अयं गिरि: this mountain, स्वाजीव: a happy place to live in, मे to me, प्रतिभाति appears.
2::56::15::सौम्य O handsome one, अस्मिन् in this, शिलोच्चये on the mountain, महात्मन: great, मुनयश्च sages, वसन्ति reside, अयम् this, वास: habitation, भवेत्तावत् let it be, अत्र here, रमेमहि will enjoy.
2::56::16::इति thus, सीता च Sita, रामश्च Rama, कृताञ्जलि: with folded palms, लक्ष्मणश्च Lakshmana also, सर्वे all, आश्रमम् hermitage, अभिगम्य having approached, वाल्मीकिम् to sage Valmiki, अभिवादयन् paid obeisance. 
2::56::17::धर्मवित् conversant with righteousness, महर्षि: the great sage (Valmiki), प्रमुदित: full of delight, तान् them, पूजयामास honoured, स्वागतम् welcome, निवेद्य having offered, अस्यताम् इति be seated, उवाच च and said.
2::56::18::तत: then, महाबाहु: mightyarmed, प्रभु: master, लक्ष्माणाग्रज: the elder brother of Lakshmana, आत्मानम् himself, यथान्यायम् duly, ऋषये to the ascetic, सन्निवेद्य having introduced, लक्ष्मणम् to Lakshmana, अब्रवीत् said.
2::56::19::सौम्य लक्ष्मण O handsome Lakshmana, दृढानि strong, वराणि च good, दारूणि logs of wood, आनय fetch, अवसथम् a dwelling, कुरुष्व build, मे मन: my mind, वासे in staying, अभिरतम् is eager.
2::56::20::सौमित्रि: son of Sumitra (Lakshmana), तस्य Rama's, तत् वचनम् those words, श्रुत्वा on hearing, विविधान् different kinds of, दृमान् logs of wood, आजहार fetched, अरिन्दम: subduer of enemies, तत: then, पर्णशालाम् cottage thatched with leaves, चक्रे built.
2::56::21::राम: Rama, निष्ठितान् firmly fixed, बद्दकटाम् with mats tied around as walls, सुदर्शनाम् goodlooking, ताम् दृष्ट्वा having seen it, शुश्रूषमाणम् on listening (to further command), एकाग्रम् with attention, इदं वचनम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::56::22::सौमित्रे O Lakshmana, ऐणेयं मांसम् venison of black antelope, आहृत्य having brought, वयम् we, शालाम् this hut, यक्ष्यामहे will worship, चिरजीविभि: those who intend to live longer, वास्तुशमनम् pacification of household deity, कर्तव्यम् should be done.
2::56::23::शुभेक्षण one who has auspicious looks, लक्ष्मण Lakshmana, मृगम् an antelope, हत्वा  having killed, क्षिप्रम् quickly, इह here, आनय bring, शास्त्रदृष्ट: as prescribed by the  scriptures, विधि: rites, कर्तव्यः हि will have to be carried out, धर्मम् the tradition, अनुस्मर recollect.
2::56::24::परवीरहा slayer of heroes of the enemy's side, स लक्ष्मण: that Lakshmana, भ्रातु: brother' s, वचनम् words, आज्ञाय having understood, यथोक्तम् as told, चकार carried out, राम: Rama, तम् him, पुन: again, अब्रवीत् said.
2::56::25::सौम्य O handsome one, एतत् this, ऐणेयम् venison, श्रपयस्व cook, वयम् we, शालाम् hut, यक्ष्यामहे will worship, अयम् this, दिवस: day, अयम् this, मुहूर्त:अपि this moment also, ध्रुवश्च is fixed, त्वर hasten. 
2::56::26::अथ then, सौमित्रि: son of Sumitra, प्रतापवान् powerful, स: लक्ष्मण: that Lakshmana, मेथ्यम् fit for offering pure, कृष्णमृगम् black antelope, हत्वा having killed, समिद्धे in a wellkindled, जातवेदसि fire, चिक्षेप offered.
2::56::27::लक्ष्मण: Lakshmana, निष्टप्तम् roasted well, छिन्नशोणितम् with blood drained out, तम् that, पक्वम्  cooked, परिज्ञाय having found, अथ then, पुरुषव्याघ्रम् tiger (best) among men, राघवम् to Rama, अब्रवीत् said. 
2::56::28::समस्ताङ्ग: with all the limbs, अयम् this, कृष्णमृग: black antelope, सर्व: completely, मया by me, श्रुत: is wellcooked, देवसङ्काश like a god, देवता: devatas, यजस्व offer with sacrifice, कुशल: असि हि you are proficient.
2::56::29::गुणवान् virtuous,जप्यकोविद: expert in reciting appropriate mantras, राम: Rama, स्नात्वा  having bathed, नियत: with his senses restrained, सत्रावसानिकान् rites performed at the end of the ritual, सर्वान् all that, मन्त्रान् mantras, सङ्ग्रहेण briefly, अकरोत् performed (intoned).
2::56::30::सर्वान् all, देवगणान् gods, इष्ट्वा having worshipped by offering, शुचिः becoming pure, अवसथम् the leafhut, विवेश entered, अमिततेजस: immeasurable lustre, रामस्य to Rama, मनोह्लादः cheer of mind, बभूव च caused.
2::56::31::राम: Rama, वैश्वदेवबलिम् oblations to Visvadevas (the entire pantheon of gods), रौद्रम् to Rudra, वैष्णवमेव च to Visnu, कृत्वा having offered, वास्तुसंशमनीयानि propitiation of the household deity (Vastu devata), मङ्गलानि auspices, प्रवर्तयन्  doing, न्यायत: according to precept, जपं च कृत्वा muttering the silent prayers, नद्याम् in the river, यथाविधि duly, स्नात्वा after bathing, पापसंशमनम् for the expiation of sins, उत्तमं बलिम् final oblation, चकार made.
2::56::32::राघव: the scion of the Raghus (Rama), आश्रमस्य of the hermitage, अनुरूपाणि befitting, वेदिस्थलविधानानि making of altars, चैत्यानि places of worship, आयतनानि च sacred places for fire, स्थापयामास established.
2::56::33::शुभलक्षणौ bestowed with auspicious qualities, राघवौ Rama and Lakshmana, सह सीतया accompanied by Sita, वन्यै: माल्यै: with garlands of forest flowers, फलै: with fruits, मूलै: with roots, पक्वै: with wellcooked, मांसै: with venison, अद्भिः with water, वेदोक्तै: as expounded in the Vedas, जपैश्च with muttering of prayers, दर्भैश्च with darbha grass,    सुसमित्कुशै: with faggots and kusa grass, भूतानि all beings, तर्पयित्वा after propitiating, तदा then, शुभाम् auspicious, शालाम् hut, विविशतुः entered.
2::56::34::वृक्षपर्णच्छदनाम् covered with the leaves of trees, मनोज्ञाम् charming, यथाप्रदेशम् built on a suitable site, सुकृताम् wellbuilt, निवाताम् protected against storm, ताम् that hut, सर्वे all, समेता together, वासाय for purposes of living, देवगणाः gods, सुधर्माम् Sudharma, सभां यथा like the court, विविशु: entered.
2::56::35::तदा then, जितेन्द्रियाः who had conquered the senses, अनेकनानामृगपक्षिसङ्कुले filled with  many varieties of animals and birds, विचित्रपुष्पस्तबकै: with bunches of bright flowers, द्रुमै with trees, युते full of, व्यालमृगानुनादिते echoing with the sounds of wild animals, वनोत्तमे in that splendid forest, सुसुखम् very happily, विजह्रु: wandered.
2::56::36::सुरम्यम् marvellous, चित्रकूटम् mount Chitrakuta, आसाद्य having reached, सुतीर्थाम् with excellent holy places, मृगपक्षिजुष्टाम् full of animals and birds, ताम् that, माल्यवतीं नदीं च that Malyavati river, हृष्ट: filled with delight, ननन्द rejoiced, पुरविप्रवासात् banishment from the city, दुखम् sorrow, जहौ च left.
