2::25::1::मनस्विनी highminded lady, माता mother, सा she, तम् आयासम् such anguish, अवनीय restraining, जलम् water, उपस्पृश्य having performed the sipping (achamana), शुचिः rite sure, रामस्य of Rama, मङ्गलानि auspicious ceremonies, चकार performed. 
2::25::2::रघूत्तम O the best among descendants of Raghu, वारयितुम् to dissuade, न शक्यसे not able,  इदानीम् now, गच्छ go, शीघ्रम् soon, विनिवर्तस्व return, सताम् of good men, क्रमे in footsteps, वर्तस्व follow.
2::25::3::राघवशार्दूल O tiger among the descendants of Raghu त्वम् you, धृत्या with courage, नियमेन च with selfdiscipline, यं धर्मम् which duty, पालयसि you are carrying out, सः धर्मः वै that duty alone, त्वाम् you, अभिरक्षतु let it protect.
2::25::4::पुत्र son, चैत्येषु in sacred places, आयतनेषु च in temples, येभ्यः to whom, प्रणमसे you are saluting, ते they, महर्षिभिः सह together with maharshis, त्वाम् you, वने in the forest,  अभिरक्षन्तु protect you. 
2::25::5::धीमता by the sagacious, विश्वामित्रेण by Viswamitra, ते to you, यानि अस्त्राणि those weapons, दत्तानि were bestowed, तानि they, गुणैः with (mantric) qualities, समुदितम् endowed, त्वाम् you, सदा always, अभिरक्षन्तु may protect.
2::25::6::महाबाहो O mighty armed, पुत्र son, पितृशुश्रूषया in the service of your father, तथा also,  मातृशुश्रूषया in the service of your mother, सत्येन with truth, अभिरक्षितः you have been  protected, चिरं जीव live long.
2::25::7::नरोत्तम best among men, समित्कुश पवित्राणि sacrificial fuel, kusha grass and sacred finger rings made of kusa grass, वेद्यश्च sacrificial altars, आयतनानि च temples also, विचित्राणि various one, स्थण्डिलानि levelled sacrificial grounds, शैलाः mountains, वृक्षाः trees, क्षुपा: plants, ह्रदाः lakes, पतङ्गा: birds, पन्नगाः serpents, सिंहाः lions, त्वाम् you, रक्षन्तु may protect.
2::25::8::साध्याश्च devatas known as 'Sadhyas', विश्वे च viswe devatas, मरुतश्च maruts (windgod), महर्षयः the great ascetics, स्वस्ति expiatory mantras, धाता sustainer (Virat Purusha), विधाता च the preserver of creation (lord Brahma), स्वस्ति bestow blessings to you, पूषा Sun, भगः the Sun known as Bhaga, अर्यमा the Sun known as Aryama, तथा also, वासवप्रमुखाः others headed by Indra, सर्वे all, ते लोकपालाश्च guardians of the world.
2::25::9::ऋतवश्चैव six seasons also, पक्षाश्च two fort nights, मासाः months, संवत्सराः years, क्षपा: nights, दिनानि च days also, मुहूर्ताश्च moments (each 48 minutes), ते to you, सदा always,  स्वस्ति कुर्वन्तु may bring propitiousness to you.
2::25::10::पुत्र O my son, स्मृतिः memory, धृतिश्च resolution(Dhriti), धर्मश्च Dharma, त्वाम् you, सर्वतः always, पातु may guard, भगवान् of divine personages, देवः god, स्कन्दश्च Skanda, सोमश्च Soma, सः that, बृहस्पतिः Brihaspati (preceptor of gods), ते to you, सप्तर्षयः seven rishis,  नारदश्च Narada, त्वाम् you, सर्वतः everywhere, रक्षन्तु protect you.
2::25::11::पुत्र O my son, सिद्धाः Siddhas, सदिगीश्वरा: along with the guardians of the quarters, याः दिशश्च those quarters, मया by me, स्तुताः are invoked, तस्मिन् वने in that forest, त्वाम् you, सर्वतः from all sides, नित्यशः at all times, पान्तु protect.
2::25::12::सर्वे all, शैलाः mountains, समुद्राश्च also seas, राजा lord, वरुण एव च Varuna, द्यौः the heaven, अन्तरिक्षम् the space, पृथिवी च the earth as well, तथैव च also, सर्वाः all,  नद्यः rivers, सर्वाणि all, नक्षत्राणि च the stars, सहदेवताः together with their presiding deities,  ग्रहाश्च planets, अहोरात्रे day and night, तथा and, सन्ध्ये dawn and dusk, आश्रितम् having taken refuge, त्वाम् you, पान्तु may protect.
2::25::13::पुण्याः pious, षट् six, ऋतवश्चैव seasons, ते to you, मासाः months, तथा also, संवत्सराः years,  कलाश्च kala, काष्ठाश्च kashta (kala and kashta are the names for the minute divisions of time), तव your, शर्म welfare, दिशन्तु you may offer.
2::25::14::मुनिवेषस्य clad in ascetic garb, महावने in the wild forest, विचरतः wandering, धीमतः sagacious, तव your, आदित्याश्च sons of Aditi, devatas, दैत्याश्च sons of Diti, daityas, सदा always, सुखदाः bestowers of happiness, भवन्तु be.
2::25::15::पुत्रक O my child, ते to you, रौद्राणाम् of the fearful, क्रूरकर्मणाम् of those committing cruel acts, राक्षसानाम् of rakshasas, पिशाचानाम् of pisachas, 'सर्वेषाम् of all, क्रव्यादानां च of flesheating animals, भयम् fear, माभूत may not be.
2::25::16::गहने in an inaccessible, कानने in the forest, तव to you, प्लवगाः monkeys,  वृश्चिकाः scorpions, दंशाः wild gnats, मशकाश्च mosquitoes also, सरीसृपाश्च reptiles also, कीटाश्च insects too, मा भूवन् may not be there.
2::25::17::पुत्रक my dear son, महाद्विपाश्च mighty elephants also, दंष्ट्रिणः with pointed incisors, सिंहाश्च lions, व्याघ्राः tigers, ऋक्षाश्च bears and, शृङ्गिणः with horns, रौद्राः fierce ones, महिषाः wild buffaloes, ते to you, न द्रुह्यन्तु may not harm.
2::25::18::पुत्र O my child, नृमांसभोजिनः cannibals, रौद्राः frightening ones, ये अन्ये all others, सत्वजातयः ferocious breeds of animals, इह here, मया by me, संपूजिताः have been worshipped, त्वाम् you, मा च हिंसिषुः may not harm. 
2::25::19::पुत्रक O my child, राम Rama, ते your, आगमाः paths, शिवाः safe (auspecious), सन्तु be, पराक्रमाश्च valour also, सिध्यन्तु be accomplished, स्वस्तिमान् safe man, सर्वसंपत्तये achieve success in everything, गच्छ go.
2::25::20::अन्तरिक्षेभ्यः from the sky, पुनः again, पार्थिवेभ्यः from earthly gods (kings), पुनः again, सर्वेभ्यः from all, देवेभ्यश्चैव from devatas also, ये ते परिपन्थिन from all those who obstruct your path, ते to you, स्वस्ति अस्तु safety be yours.
2::25::21::राम Rama, गुरुः Guru or Brihaspati, सोमश्च Moon also, सूर्यश्च Sun too, अथ also, धनदः Kubera, तथा also, यमः Yama, अर्चिताः having been worshipped, दण्डकारण्यवासिनम् living in Dandaka forest, त्वाम् you, पान्तु may protect you.
2::25::22::रघुनन्दन O Joy of the Raghus O Son of the Raghu race, उपस्पर्शनकाले at the time of taking bath, त्वाम् you, अग्नि: fire,  वायुः wind, तथा also, धूमः smoke, ऋषिमुखात् from the mouths of rishis, च्युताः released,  मन्त्राश्च mantras, पान्तु protect you.
2::25::23::सर्वलोकप्रभुः lord of all the worlds, Siva, ब्रह्मा Brahma, भूतभर्ता supporter of beings, Visnu, तथा also, ऋषयः rishis, शेषाः the remaining, ये सुराः those gods, ते to you,  वनवासिनम् dwelling in the forest, त्वाम् you, रक्षन्तु protect.
2::25::24::यशस्विनी illustrious lady, आयतलोचना largeeyed (Kausalya), इति thus, माल्यैः with garlands, गन्धैश्चापि with fragrant susbtances, अनुरूपाभिः by appropriate articles, स्तुतिभिश्च with prayers, सुरगणान् hosts of gods, आनर्च worshipped.
2::25::25::ज्वलनम् the sacred fire, समुपादाय having arranged, राममङ्गल कारणात् for the welfare of Rama, महात्मना great, ब्राह्मणेन by the brahmin (priest), विधिना duly, हावयामास offered oblations.
2::25::26::परमाङ्गना noble lady, कौशल्या Kausalya, घृतम् clarified butter, श्वेतानि white,  माल्यानि garlands of flowers, समिधः sacred fuel, श्वेत सर्षपान् white grains of mustard seed,  उपसंपादयामास obtained.
2::25::27::सः उपाध्यायः that officiating priest, विधिना duly, अनामयम् sound health, शान्तिं हुत्वा having performed sacrificial offerings for peace, हुतहव्यावशेषेण with the remainder of the offerings, बाह्यम् external, बलिम् ceremonies, अकल्पयत् performed. 
2::25::28::मधु दध्यक्षतघृतैः with honey, curds, rice and clarified butter, द्विजान् brahmins, स्वस्तिवाच्य  who pronounced benedictory prayers, ततः thereafter, वने in the forest, रामस्य of Rama, स्वस्त्ययनक्रियाः reciting mantras preparatory for averting evil, वाचयामास got recited.
2::25::29::यशस्विनी illustrious, राममाता Rama's mother, ततः thereafter, तस्मै that, द्विजेन्द्राय best among brahmins, काम्याम् as desired, दक्षिणाम् appropriate gifts, प्रददौ gave, राघवम् to Rama, इदम् these words, अब्रवीत् च also spoke.
2::25::30::वृत्रनाशे at the time of slaying of Vritra, सर्वदेवनमस्कृते salutations bestowed by all gods,  सहस्राक्षे on god of a thousand eyes (Indra), यत् whichever, मङ्गलम् blessings, समभवत् was bestowed, तत् मङ्गलम् that auspiciousness, ते भवतु may happen to you.
2::25::31::पुरा formely, अमृतम् nectar, प्रार्थयानस्य while seeking, सुपर्णस्य for Garuda,  विनता Vinata, यत् मङ्गलम् which blessings, अकल्पयत् created, तत् मङ्गलम् that auspiciousness, ते भवतु happen to you.
2::25::32::अदितिः Aditi, अमृतोत्पादने at the time of churning out nectar, दैत्यान् the daityas, घ्नतः slew, वज्रधरस्य of the wielder of thunder (Indras's), तत् मङ्गलम् blessings, प्रादात् gave, तत् मङ्गलम् blessings, ते भवतु may be yours.
2::25::33::राम O Rama, त्रीन् three, विक्रमान् strides, प्रक्रमतः of him who was occupying, अमिततेजसः highly lustrous, विष्णोः Visnu's, यत् मङ्गलम् whichever auspiciousness, आसीत् was to be, तत् मङ्गलानि that auspiciousness, ते भवतु may be yours.
2::25::34::महाबाहो O mightyarmed one, शुभमङ्गलाः auspicious happenings, ऋतवः seasons, सागराः seas, द्वीपाः islands, वेदाः the Vedas, लोकाः worlds, दिशश्च the quarters, ते to you,  मङ्गलानि blessings, दिशन्तु let them bestow. 
2::25::35::आयतलोचना largeeyed lady, भामिनी beautiful lady, कौशल्या Kausalya, इति in this way uttering, पुत्रस्य son's, शिरसि on the head, शेषाश्च the remains (of offerings), कृत्वा having offered, रामम् Rama, गन्धैश्चापि with sandalpaste also, समालभ्य having applied, सिद्धार्थां  for fruitful attainment, शुभाम् auspicious, विशल्यकरणीम् Vishalyakarani, (capable of removing extraneous substances causing great pain in the body), ओषधीम् medicinal herb, रक्षाम् armlet, चकार made, मन्त्रै: with sacred prayers, अभिजजाप च muttered repeatedly in a low tone.
2::25::36::दुःखवशवर्तिनी filled with distress, सा she, अतिप्रहृष्टेव as if she was exceedingly happy,  संसज्जमानया with confused, वाचा with a tone, वाङ्मात्रेण in mere words, उवाच said, भावेन न not with mind.
2::25::37::यशस्विनी illustrious lady, आनम्य bending him down, मूर्ध्नि on his forehead, आघ्राय having smelt, परिष्वज्य having embraced, अवदत् spoke, पुत्र O son, राम Rama, सिद्धार्थः having fulfilled your objective, यथा सुखम् in peace and happiness, गच्छ go.
2::25::38::वत्स O my son, अरोगम् without illness, सर्वसिद्धार्थम् accomplishing all objectives, सुखम्  happily (in good health), पुनः again, अयोध्याम् to Ayodhya, आगतम् having reached,  राजवर्त्मनि on the royal path (as king), सुस्थितम् firmly standing, त्वाम् you, पश्यामि I shall behold.
2::25::39::वनात् from the forest, प्राप्तम् having received, त्वाम् you, उदितम् rising, पूर्णचन्द्रमिव like full moon, प्रणष्टदुःखसंकल्पा having removed my sorrowful thoughts, हर्षविद्योतितानना my face sparkling with joy, द्रक्ष्यामि shall behold.
2::25::40::राम O Rama, पितुः वचः father's words, तीर्णवन्तम् having crossed (fuliflled), वनवासात् from your exile, इह here, पुनः again, आगतम् having arrived, त्वाम् you, भद्रासनगतम् sitting on the throne,  द्रक्ष्यामि I shall see.
2::25::41::भोः O Rama, वनवासात् from the forest, इह here, आगतः having returned, मङ्गलै: with auspicious events, उपसम्पन्नः endowed with, त्वम् you, वध्वाः of my daughterinlaw (Sita's), मम च for me also, कामान् desires, नित्यम् always, संवर्ध enhance, याहि go.
2::25::42::राघव O son of the Raghu race मया by me, अर्चिताः worshipped, शिवादयः Siva and others, देवगणाः gods, महर्षयः the great rishis, भूतमहासुरोरगाः bhutas, great asuras, serpents, दिशश्च four quarters, वनम् to the forest, अभिप्रयातस्य having exiled, ते your, हितानि welfare,  चिराय for a long time, काङ्क्षन्तु may wish for.
2::25::43::इतीव speaking thus, सा she, अश्रुप्रतिपूर्णलोचना eyes filled with tears, यथाविधि duly, स्वस्त्ययनम् benedictory rites, समाप्य च having completed, राघवम् to the descendant of the Raghu dynasty, प्रदक्षिणं चकार circumambulate, पुनः पुनः च अपि repeatedly, निपीड्य holding him tight, सस्वजे embraced.
2::25::44::देव्या by Devi Kausalya, तथा that way, कृतप्रदक्षिणः having circumambulated, सः Rama,  मातुः his mothers, चरणौ feet, पुनः पुनः again and again, निपीड्य holding fast, महायशाः illustrious, सः राघवः that son of the Raghu race, स्वया by his own, श्रिया with glory, प्रज्वलितः glowing, सीतानिलयम् to the palace of Sita, जगाम went.
