2::100::1::Rama beheld Bharata with matted locks and robes of bark fallen down on the ground with folded hands like the Sun at the time of dissolution of the world. It was really difficult to look at him.
2::100::2::Rama found it extremely difficult to recognise Bharata with his emaciated body and pallid face. He held him in his arms and lifted him.
2::100::3::Born in the race of Raghu, Rama embraced Bharata and kissed him on his forehead. Placing him on his lap, he enquired thus with a composed mind:
2::100::4::O dear, now that you have come to the forest, where is our father king Dasaratha? You ought not come to the forest while he is living.
2::100::5::You have come a long distance (from Ayodhya) to this forest, O Bharata It is a pity,  dear brother, to see you after a long time, so emaciated. What brings you to the forest?
2::100::6::My dear (brother), now that you have come here, I trust, king Dasaratha is keeping good health and hope, he has not departed prematurely in despondency for the other world.
2::100::7::O gentle one, being young and inexperienced, I trust, you have not forfeited the kingdom for ever. Dear child, I trust, you are looking after father whose prowess is his truthfulness.
2::100::8::I trust king Dasaratha, who is true to his promise, a performer of Rajasuya and Ashwamedha sacrifices and a firm adherent of righteousness is in good health.
2::100::9::O dear child I trust, the family preceptor of the Ikshvakus, Vasistha, the brahmin (versed in the Vedas), who is learned, ever fixed in virtues and effulgent is being honoured as usual.
2::100::10::Dear child I trust, Kausalya and Sumitra, mothers of an excellent progeny are happy. I trust, the noble queen Kaikeyi is happy too.
2::100::11::I trust, you continue to honour the family priest (Suyajna, son of Vasistha) who is endowed with modesty, born of high family, conversant in scriptures, free from envy and who can give you directions with regard to your duties.
2::100::12::I trust, the sagacious priest who knows ritual precepts, who is upright and is employed to take care of your sacred fires, informs you always regarding what was offered and what is to be offered as oblation at appropriate time.
2::100::13::Dear brother, I trust you continue to pay homage to gods, father, mothers, teachers, relations equal to your father, aged people, physicians and brahmins.
2::100::14::I hope you treat with respect Sudhanva who is equipped with the most formidable arrows and other weapons propelled by mantras and a master in the science of statecraft.
2::100::15::I hope, dear brother, you have appointed men who are brave, learned, selfcontrolled, of noble birth and skilled in guessing from hints.
2::100::16::O Bharata the wellguarded advice of ministers, learned in scriptures and capable of proper counselling, is the root of victory for kings, specially when the advice is kept in confidence.
2::100::17::I trust you are not under the grip of sleep but wake up at appropriate times, I hope you always think of the means of judicious statecraft during the last part of the night.
2::100::18::I hope you neither decide alone nor discuss with many. I trust a decision once made by you is not leaked in the kingdom.
2::100::19::O Bharata, having determined on an endeavour involving a little effort and yielding great results, I trust you commence to execute it quickly without procrastination? 
2::100::20::I trust, other kings come to know of your endeavours only when your endeavours suceed or about to succeed. I hope, efforts intended to be made in future are not revealed to them beforehand.
2::100::21::Dear brother, I hope others are not able to understand your determination or those of your ministers, either by conjecture or by inference or through other means without being revealed either by you or by your ministers.
2::100::22::I hope by setting aside a thousand fools, you prefer a single wise man. A wise man will be of immense help in difficult situations.
2::100::23::Even if the king seeks the assistance from thousands or tens of thousands of fools, they cannot render any help to him.
2::100::24::A single clearsighted minister who is prudent, brave and skilful can bring about great prosperity to a king or a prince.
2::100::25::I hope you have employed highly competent servants for important tasks, mediocre servants in mediocre tasks and low people in inferior tasks.
2::100::26::I hope you are assigning ministers, who are unyielding to bribery and other temptations, holding positions hereditarily and who are full of integrity and eminence, with superior tasks.
2::100::27::Are not the citizens of your kingdom agitated at severe punishment meted out to them reproaching your ministers? 
2::100::28::Just like a performer of sacrifice scorns at an outcaste or a woman scorns at a lustful lover, do the subjects not scorn you for collecting taxes more than what is due?
2::100::29::A learned person but skilled in contrivances, a warrior with passion for wealth and a man ever engaged in corrupting the minds of servants must be slain. A king who does not kill them is himself killed in due course. 
2::100::30::I trust you have appointed a man who is cheerful, brave, sagacious, steadfast, honest, of a good family, loyal and efficient as the army chief.
2::100::31::I trust you honour and respect those prominent soldiers who are courageous, powerful, skilled in war and who have proven heroic exploits.
2::100::32::I trust you distribute rations and wages to your army in due time without making delay.
2::100::33::It has been mentioned in the scriptures that if provisions and wages are not paid in stipulated time, the dependent attendants will be incensed with their masters and will turn hostile and become corrupt, leading to great calamity.
2::100::34::I hope all men of a good family, especially those who belong to our race, are loyal to you and are ready to sacrifice their lives for your cause. 
2::100::35::O Bharata, I hope you have chosen as your envoy an expert born in your own country, wellinformed, skilful and quick to understand one who repeats and reports (exactly) what has been told.
2::100::36::I hope you collect information (of their secret efforts) intelligently through unrecognisable spies with three of them closely watching each of the eighteen officials (there are eighteen categories of officials in a kingdom) of the enemy's side and fifteen (officials) on your side.
2::100::37::O slayer of foes, I hope you are always alert about your foes who were defeated by you and have come back. You should not ignore your enemies thinking they are weak.
2::100::38::Dear brother, I hope you do not serve those brahmins who are atheists, who foolishly think of this world alone and fancy themselves as learned. They only bring disasters.
2::100::39::While principal scriptures do exist, these superficial fellows take resort to the science of logic based on abstract reasoning, and indulge in futile talks.
2::100::40::My dear brother I trust you are protecting the (impregnable) city of Ayodhya worthy of its name, formerly defended by our heroic ancestors, with its sturdy gates, its elephants, horses and chariots, its thousands of venerable, selfcontrolled and highly energetic brahmins, kshatriyas and vaisyas engaged in their respective professions, filled with palaces of various kinds, abounding in learned people and a prosperous city where everything is available in abundance.
2::100::41::O Bharata, my country which is marked with hundreds of sanctuaries near villages where life of the people is made comfortable, where there are shrines, water distribution facilities and tanks, which is wellploughed and rich in cattlewealth, free from violence and independent of rain. It is enchanting. It is safe from wild animals. With fears expelled, free from sinful people, adorned with mines and wellprotected by my ancestors, it is prosperous and I hope people are living comfortably.
2::100::42::I trust all those men who live on agriculture and cattlerearing are favourable to you. The world's prosperity, dear brother, grows on the profession of cattle rearing.
2::100::43::I trust you nourish them and also afford portection and prevent adversities. A king must protect all those people living in his country in accordanc with righteousness.
2::100::44::I trust, you keep the women pacified and wellprotected, you do not believe their words and do not divulge any secrets to them.
2::100::45::I trust, you protect the habitat of elephants and you have a large number of milch cows. I trust you are not contented with the existing number of female and male  elephants and horses.
2::100::46::O prince, I trust, you rise early daily and present yourself welladomed to the people on the thoroughfare.
2::100::47::All the servants, I trust, do not present themselves to you directly. At the same time they do not remain out of sight with fear at a distance. The middle course is the best way for the welfare of every one.
2::100::48::Hope all the forts are adequately provided with wealth, foodgrains, weapons and water, with machines of war and craftsmen and archers.
2::100::49::O Bharata, I trust, your revenues are abundant and expenditure much less. I trust you do not give away your treasure to undeserving persons.
2::100::50::I trust, you are spending only on gods, ancestors, brahmins, guests, warriors and hosts of friends.
2::100::51::I trust a man who is honest, purehearted and venerable, falsely accused of adultery is not slain out of avarice without consulting experts in scriptures.
2::100::52::O best among men I trust that a thief, caught redhanded and interrogated and has sufficient proof is not set free, out of greed for money.
2::100::53::O Bharata, I trust that your ministers are wellinformed and look into all matters in times of hardship pertaining to whether a man is rich or poor without any bias to either.
2::100::54::O Bharata, the tears falling from the eyes of persons, who are falsely accused and punished for the pleasure of the king will destroy his progeny and cattle as well. 
2::100::55::O Bharata, I trust you wish to thrive by treating the old, children and foremost of learned people with the three expedients namely gifts, affection and kind words.
2::100::56::I trust you pay homage to the preceptors, the aged ones, ascetics, gods and guests, to shrines and to accomplished brahmins.
2::100::57::I trust, righteousness for the sake of prosperity or prosperity for the sake of righteousness or both for the sake of sensual pleasure are not thwarted by you.
2::100::58::O Bharata, the best among the victorious, conversant with timely actions and a bestower of boons you are the best of men. I trust, you allocate adequate time for attending to all the three expedients of life like dharma, artha and kama.
2::100::59::O highly sagacious Bharata, those brahmins who can comprehend the meaning of all scriptures along with the inhabitants of the city and country, I trust, are seeking your happiness.
2::100::60::I trust you eschew the fourteen faults of kings, like atheism, falsehood, anger, inattention, procrastination, evading the wise, indolence, gratification of all five senses, planning alone in the affairs of the kingdom, consultation with people who are proficient in worthless acts, failure to implement decisious, inability to keep the counsel secret and omission of auspicious practices and setting out against all the enemies at a time. 
2::100::61::O highly sagacious Bharata, I trust, having understood their true nature you are appropriately following the ten, five and four divisions, the seven divisions, the eight divisions, the three divisions, three kinds of knowledge, victory over the senses, the six qualities, evils arising from destiny and human agency, kritya, division of twenty, similarly Prakriti and Mandalas and two sources of Yatra and chastisement and of peace and war.
2::100::62::I trust you deliberate in secrecy on your counsel with three or four counsellors, together and separately with each one, as laid down in sacred texts.
2::100::63::I trust, the Vedas you have studied are fruitful, the acts which you commenced are productive, your wife is fruitful (blessed with a son) and the scriptures you studied are useful. 
2::100::64::O Bharata, I trust your intellect is in conformity with what I said conducive to long life, and fame in accordance with righteousness, (legitimate) pleasure and prosperity.
2::100::65::I trust, you walk the auspicious path of truth (virtue) followed by our father and forefathers.
2::100::66::O Bharata, I trust you do not partake delicious food all by yourself, and you share it with your friends when they want it.
2::100::67::The highly sagacious and learned king, having acquired the entire earth and punishing the people in accordance with tradition and righteously ruling the kingdom, will ascend the his release (from this world).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे शततमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the hundredth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
