2::16::1::Sumantra, who was conversant with ancient traditions, passed through the entrance of the inner apartment full of people and reached the sparsely crowded courtyard. There alert, loyal young men were attentively guarding the frontyard, armed with spears and bows and wearing shining earrings.
2::16::2::Sumantra, who was conversant with ancient traditions, passed through the entrance of the inner apartment full of people and reached the sparsely crowded courtyard. There alert, loyal young men were attentively guarding the frontyard, armed with spears and bows and wearing shining earrings.
2::16::3::He saw aged people appointed as security staff for women's apartments. They were welladorned, dressed in orange robes and with rapt attention stood holding staff in their hands.
2::16::4::On seeing (Sumantra) arriving, all of them, wellwishers to Rama, quickly rose from their seats.
2::16::5::.Humble and extremely courteous charioteer (to the guards) said, Inform Rama at once that Sumantra is waiting at the entrance.
2::16::6::Always dedicated to the wellbeing of their master, they approached Rama who was in the company of Sita. And informed him:
2::16::7::Coming to know that Sumantra who is intimate to his father had arrived, Rama, in order to please him, commanded that he be escorted to that very place. 
2::16::8::Sumantra beheld Rama, who resembled Kubera. Rama was sitting on a richlycovered golden couch, welladorned and anointed with precious, pure, fragrant red sandalpaste the colour of which appeared like the blood of a hog. With Sita standing by his side with a fan of yak's tail in her hand Rama, the tormentor of foes, looked like the Moon united with (the star) Chitra.
2::16::9:: Sumantra who knew the art of modesty, made humble, reverential salutation to Rama  the granter of boons, shining like the Sun with his own effulgence.
2::16::10::On seeing Rama of charming countenance relaxing on a couch, Sumantra, honourable to the king (Dasaratha) said these words with folded palms.
2::16::11::O Rama, worthy son of Kausalya, your father along with queen Kaikeyi desires to see you.You may go there. Please do not delay.
2::16::12::Highly lustrous Rama ,the lion among men, when thus spoken to, was immensely pleased and extending due honour to him said to Sita:
2::16::13::O Sita, I am sure the king and queen are discussing something relating to my consecration.
2::16::14::Darkeyed and highly favoured wellwisher of the king (Kaikeyi) is urging him for my sake in view of his intention.
2::16::15::My mother, daughter of the king of Kekaya, knows the king's intention and, heppy to do me good, seeks my wellbeing.
2::16::16:: It is our fortune that the king and his dear queen have sent Sumantra as messenger who is interested in my prosperity and pleasure.
2::16::17::There worthy of the council of the king and the queen, a befitting messenger has come. Assuredly the king will consecrate me as heirapparent this very day.
2::16::18::I shall go from here immediately and see the king. Remain here happily and rejoice with your maids. 
2::16::19::Reflecting over the auspicious event, the darkeyed Sita who is highly esteemed by her husband, followed him up to the entrance, (saying):
2::16::20:: The king will bestow upon you, like the creator of the world (Brahma) bestowing on Indra, the kingdom served by brahmins who are fit to perform 'Rajasuya' sacrifice at the time of consecration.
2::16::21::I shall be delighted to see you initiated and engaged in the observance of the vow made pure, wearing excellent deerskin and carrying the horns of an antelope in your hand.
2::16::22::May Indra protect you on the east, Yama in the south, Varuna in the west and Kubera in the north.
2::16::23::Adorned in auspicious ornaments, Rama took leave of Sita and departed from his palace accompanied by Sumantra.
2::16::24::Like a lion living in a mountain cave and coming out of it, Rama while exiting, saw Lakshmana at the entrance bowing with folded hands.
2::16::25::Rama, the best among men, met all his friends in the middle courtyard. Having seen them all eager to see him, he approached and greeted them. Thereafter, he mounted the best silver chariot covered with tigerskin and glowing like fire.
2::16::26::The sound emanating from the chariot resembled the thunder. The spacious chariot was decorated with gold and gems which dazzled the eyes as though they shed the lustre of the Sun. The swiftmoving chariot was harnessed by excellent horses as if they were young elephants. Like the thousandeyed Indra, Rama, ablaze with royal splendour, mounted this chariot and sped away.
2::16::27::The magnificent chariot, rumbling like a stormcloud in the sky, emerged from (Rama's) residence like the Moon peeping through a huge cloud.
2::16::28::Holding an umbrella and a fan made of yak's tail in his hand Lakshmana boarded the chariot at the rear, guarding his brother.
2::16::29::As it (the chariot) was passing out, a tumultuoas roar emanated from the multitude of people all around. 
2::16::30::Then the chief commanders riding the best of the horses and elephants, resembling hills in size, followed Rama in their hundreds and thousands.
2::16::31::Soldiers, anointing their bodies with pastes of sandal and aloe wood, equipped with armour and holding swords and bows, went ahead heralding his (Rama's) arrival. 
2::16::32::At that time, sounds of musical instruments and songs of eulogy by panegyrists, roarings of warriors were heard on the way.
2::16::33::Rama, the subduer of enemies, proceeded while the wellattired women standing at the windows of their mansions showered heaps of flowers on him from every side.
2::16::34::Women with faultless limbs standing on their housetops as well as on the ground paid their homage with charming words in order to propitiate Rama. 
2::16::35::O Joy of your mother (Rama) on seeing you having successfully acomplished the purpose of your journey (life) by securing your father's kingdom, your mother Kausalya will surely be delighted.
2::16::36::Those women considered Sita who was dear to the heart of Rama the best among all women.
2::16::37::Sita was united with Rama like Rohini with the Moon surely because of her great austerities performed in the past. (They observed).
2::16::38::Rama, the best among men, while riding along the highway overheard the pleasing words uttered by women standing on the elevation of their buildings. Thus hearing his own praise Rama proceeded along the highway.
2::16::39::Rama heard these various words of admiration by people who had assembled there, and (witnessed) the rejoicings of the citizens.
2::16::40::This scion of the Raghus (Rama) is going to acquire the earth and the wealth today by the king's grace. He will be our protector and fulfil all our desires.
2::16::41::If this Rama obtains the entire kingdom for a long time, it will be in the interest of the people. If he becomes king none will ever witness anything unpleasant or sad. (They observed). 
2::16::42::With bards, panegyrists and great musical performers invoking blessings and walking ahead, he (Rama) proceeded, like Kubera amid intoxicated elephants  and horses. 
2::16::43::Rama beheld the beautiful highway filled with precious stones and merchandise (for sale), thronged with elephants, horses and chariots, the crossroads crowded with multitude of people.  इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे षोडशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixteenth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
