2::7::1::यत: जाता from the time of her birth, कैकेय्या सह along with Kaikeyi, ऊषिता living, ज्ञातिदासी family servant, यदृच्छया casually, चन्द्रसङ्काशम् resembling the Moon, प्रासादम् palace, आरुरोह ascended.
2::7::2::मन्थरा Manthara, सिक्तराजपथाम् highway sprinkled with water, प्रकीर्णकुसुमोत्कराम् strewn with a lot of flowers, कृत्स्नाम् whole, अयोध्याम् Ayodhya, तस्मात् from that, प्रासादात् palace, अन्ववैक्षत beheld.
2::7::3::मन्थरा Manthara, तस्मात् प्रासादात् from that palace, वरार्हाभि: by costly, पताकाभि: with banners, ध्वजैश्च with flags, समलङ्कृताम् welldecorated, छन्दपथै: च अपि labyrinthine thoroughfares also, वृताम् enveloped by, शिरस्स्नातजनै: with men who had, वृताम् surrounded by, माल्यमोदकहस्तै: holding garlands and sweetmeats in their hands, द्विजेन्द्रै: with the best of brahmins, अभिनादिताम् reverberating, शुक्ल देवगृहद्वाराम् with temples with white doors, सर्ववादित्रनिस्वनाम् with sounds from every kind of musical instrument, सम्प्रहृष्टजनाकीर्णाम् filled with joyful crowds, ब्रह्मघोषाभिनादिताम् echoed  with the chanting of the Vedas, प्रहृष्टवरहस्त्यश्वाम् with the best boisterous horses and elephants, सम्प्रणर्दितगोवृषाम् with the lowing and bellowing of cows and bulls, प्रहृष्टमुदितै: with great joy, पौरै: by the citizens, उच्छ्रितध्वजमालिनीम् encircled by elevated pennants, अयोध्याम् to Ayodhya, विस्मयमागता was astonished.
2::7::4::मन्थरा Manthara, प्रहर्षोत्फुल्लनयनाम् whose eyes were expanded with delight, पाण्डुरक्षौमवासिनीम् clad in white silk garment, अविदूरे not very far, स्थिताम् standing, धात्रीम् to a royal  maid, दृष्ट्वा  having seen, पप्रच्छ enquired.
2::7::5::राममाता Rama's mother, अर्थपरासती one interested in wealth, उत्तमेन great, हर्षेण with joy, अभिसंयुक्ता possessed of, जनेभ्य: for men, धनम् wealth, किं नु सम्प्रयच्छति why is she gifting away?
2::7::6::जनस्य for men, अयम् this, अतिमात्रप्रहर्ष: exceedingly happy, किम् why?, मे to me, शंस tell, सम्प्रहृष्ट: delighted, महीपति: king, किं वापि what is he, कारयिष्यति वा proposing to do ?
2::7::7::धात्री तु the royal maid, हर्षेण with delight, विदीर्यमाणा bursting, अथ threafter, कुब्जायै for that hunchback, भूयसीम् greater, राघवश्रियम् about the fortune of Rama, परया great, मुदा with delight, आचचक्षे related.
2::7::8::दशरथ: राजा king Dasaratha, श्व: tomorrow, पुष्येण under the star Pushya, राघवम् born in the race of Raghu, अनघम् blameless रामम् to Rama, यौवराज्येन as heirapparent, अभिषेचयिता will consecrate.
2::7::9::कुब्जा that hunchback, धात्र्या: वचनम् the words of royal maid, शृत्वा having heard, अमर्षिता  was furious, कैलासशिखराकारात् resembling the peak of mount Kailasa, प्रासादात् from the palace, क्षिप्रम् speedily, अवरोहत descended.
2::7::10::पापदर्शिनी malevolent, सा मन्थरा that Manthara, कोपेन with fury, दह्यमाना burning, शयानाम् as she lay upon her couch, कैकेयीम् Kaikeyi, एत्य having reached,  इदम् this, वचनम् words, अब्रवीत् said. 
2::7::11::मूढे O senseless one, उत्तिष्ठ get up, किम् why, शेषे are sleeping, भयम् fear, त्वाम् you, अभिवर्तते is approaching you, अमौघेन in a sea of perils, उपप्लुताम् floating, आत्मानम् about yourself, न बुध्यसे why do not you realise?
2::7::12::सुभगाकारे you appear to be your husband's darling, अनिष्टे O one disliked (by the husband), सौभाग्येन with your good fortune, विकत्थसे you are boasting, उष्णगे in summer season, नद्या: river's, स्रोत: इव like a flow, तव your, सौभाग्यम् good fortune, चलं हि is unstable indeed.
2::7::13::रुष्टया in a rage, पापदर्शिन्या evileyed, कुब्जया by the hunchback (Manthara), एवम् in this way, परुषं वच: harsh words, उक्ता having spoken, कैकेयी Kaikeyi, परम् great, विषादम् despondency, अगमत् obtained.
2::7::14::कैकेयी तु as for Kaikeyi, कुब्जाम् to the hunchback, अब्रवीत् spoke, मन्थरे O Manthara, क्षेमम् कच्चित् all is well I hope?, त्वाम् you, विषण्णवदनाम् a dejected face, भृशदु:खिताम् to deeply sorrowful, लक्षये हि I observe indeed.
2::7::15::वाक्यविशारदा skilled in speech, मन्थरा तु Manthara, मधुराक्षरम् in sweet accent, कैकेय्या: वच: the words of  Kaikeyi, श्रुत्वा having heard, क्रोधसंयुक्ता filled with anger, वाक्यम् words, उवाच said.
2::7::16::सा कुब्जा that hunchback, विषण्णतरा भूत्वा being still more depressed, तस्या: her, हितैषिणी desiring the welfare, विषादयन्ती causing despondency, राघवम् of Rama, भेदयन्ती च also separating, प्रोवाच said.
2::7::17::देवि O queen, अक्षय्यम् unending, सुमहत् immense, त्वद्विनाशनम् your ruin, प्रवृत्तम् is in the offing, राजा दशरथ: king Dasaratha, रामम् of Rama, यौवराज्ये as heirapparent, अभिषेक्ष्यति is crowning.  
2::7::18::सा such I am, अगाधे in unfathomable, भये in fear, मग्ना plunged, दु:खशोकसमन्विता stricken with grief and tears, अनलेन by fire, दह्यमानेव as if being burnt, त्वद्धितार्थम् for your welfare, इह here, आगता have come.
2::7::19::कैकेयि O Kaikeyi, तव दु:खेन with your grief, मम my, महत् great, दु:खम् भवेत् distress will occur, त्वद्वृद्धौ in your prosperity, मम my, वृद्धिश्च prosperity, भवेत् would become, अत्र in this aspect, न संशय: there is no doubt.
2::7::20::देवि O queen, नराधिपकुले in the royal family, जाता you are born, महीपते: महिषी the king's consort, त्वम् you, राजधर्माणाम् of the statecraft, उग्रत्वम् cruelty, कथम् how, न बुध्यसे do not realise.
2::7::21::भर्ता your husband, धर्मावादी one who speaks of morals, शठ: one who is deceitful, श्लक्ष्णवादी one who speaks gently, दारुण: च cruel also, शुद्धभावे of innocent nature, तेन by such person, एवम् thus, अतिसन्धिता beguiled, न जानीषे you do  not understand.
2::7::22::उपस्थित: have approached, अनर्थकम् meaningless, सान्त्वम् appeasing words, त्वयि in you, प्रयुञ्जान: while confers, ते भर्ता your husband, अद्य today, कौसल्यामेव only for Kausalya, अर्थेन with advantage, योजयिष्यति will bestow.
2::7::23::दुष्टात्मा evilminded one, स: he, भरतम् Bharata, तव बन्धुषु to your relations, अपवाह्य having sent, काल्ये at dawn tomorrow, रामम् Rama, निहतकण्टके rid of the thorns, राज्ये in the kingdom, स्थापयिता will be established.
2::7::24::बाले O child मात्रेव like a mother, त्वया by you, हितकाम्यया desirous of wellbeing, आशीविष:      venomous serpent, अङ्केनेव in your lap, शत्रु: enemy, पतिप्रवादेन with the belief that he is the husband, परिधृत: preserved.
2::7::25::सपुत्रा along with your son, त्वम् you, राज्ञा by the kng, दशरथेन by Dasaratha, प्रत्युपेक्षित: ignored, सर्पो वा snake or, शत्रुर्वा or enemy, यथा just like, कुर्यात् would do, तथा in the same way, कृता has been done.
2::7::26::नित्यसुखोचिते always accustomed to comfort, बाले O child अनृतसान्त्वेन with deceitful words of appeasement, रामम् to Rama, राज्ये in the kingdom, स्थापयता installing, पापेन by that vicious one, सानुबन्धा along with your son, हता असिहि surely have been ruined.
2::7::27::कैकेयि O Kaikeyi, सा such you are, तव your, हितम् wellbeing, प्राप्तकालम् appropriate time has come, क्षिप्रम् quickly, कुरु act, विस्मयदर्शने O fool पुत्रम् your son, आत्मानम् yourself, मां च also me, त्रायस्व save.
2::7::28::शयाना lying in her couch, सा that Kaikeyi, शुभानना with a charming countenance, मन्थराया: Manthara's, वच: words, श्रुत्वा having heard, हर्षसंपूर्णा full of joy, शारदी autumnal, चन्द्रलेखेव Moon's crescent, उत्तस्थौ rose.
2::7::29::सा कैकेयी that Kaikeyi, अतीव exceedingly, संहृष्टा pleased, विस्मयान्विता filled with astonishment, तस्यै कुब्जायै for that hunckback, एकम् one, शुभम् beautiful, आभरणम् ornament, ददौ gave.
2::7::30::प्रमदोत्तमा the best among beautiful women, कैकेयी Kaikeyi, तस्यै कुब्जायै to that hunchback, आभरणम् ornament, दत्वा looking at, मन्थराम् Manthara, दृष्ट्वा having seen, पुन: एव again, इदम् these (words), अब्रवीत् spoke.
2::7::31::मन्थरे O Manthara, मह्यम् for me, परमम् exceedingly, प्रियम् pleasant, इदम् this (news), आख्यासि telling, मे to me, प्रियम् pleasant (news), आख्यातु: one who communicates, एतत् this one is the gift, ते for you, भूय: still more, किं वा anything, करोमि shall I do?
2::7::32::अहम् I, रामे वा either in Rama, भरते वा or in Bharata, विशेषम् distinction, नोपलक्षये do not see, तस्मात् as such, राजा king, रामम् to Rama, राज्ये in the kingdom, यत् अभिषेक्ष्यति if installs, तुष्टा अस्मि am contented
2::7::33::प्रियार्हे O woman worthy of affection, मे to me, इत: than this, परम् great, न किञ्चित् nothing, न not, त्वयापि by you, परम् exceedingly, प्रियम् dear, वच: words, सुवचम् cannot be expressed easily, न not, त्वम् you, तथा thus, प्रियोत्तरम् best among the dear ones, अवोच: हि have told, अत: now, परम् best, वरम् reward, ते to you, प्रददामि shall bestow, तम् that one, वृणु ask for.
