2::10::1::सा देवी that queen (Kaikeyi), भृशम् exceedingly, पापया sinful one, कुब्जया by hunchback (Manthara), यदा when, विदर्शिता perversely advised, तदा then, दिग्धविद्धेव as if struck by a poisonous arrow, किन्नरीव like a 'kinnari', भूमौ on the floor, शेते स्म lay down.
2::10::2::विचक्षणा intelligent, सा भामिनी that beautiful lady, इति thus, सम्यक् correctly, मनसा in her mind, कृत्यम् the strategy, निश्चित्य having decided, सर्वम् everything, शनै: slowly, मन्थरायै to Manthara, आचचक्षे told.
2::10::3::सा भामिनी that beautiful lady (Kaikeyi), मन्थरावाक्यमोहिता impressed by Manthara's words, दीना wretch, निश्चयं कृत्वा having decided, नागकन्येव like a female serpent, दीर्घम्  deeply, उष्णं च also hot, निश्वस्य having sighed, मुहूर्तम् for a while, आत्मसुखावहम् bringing  happiness to herself, मार्गम् means, चिन्तयामास thought of.
2::10::4::सुहृच्च also a friend, अर्थकामा च desiring to fulfil the resolve, सा मन्थरा that Manthara, तम् that, सुनिश्चयम् firm determination, निशम्य having heard, सिद्धिम् acomplishment of the objective, प्राप्येव as if, परमप्रीता highly pleased, बभूव became.
2::10::5::अथ then, देवी queen, सा अबला that woman,रुषिता soiled, सम्यक् completely, विनिश्चयम् firm decision, कृत्वा having taken, मुखे on the face, भृकुटीम् frown, निवेश्य having placed, भूमौ on the floor, संविवेश lay down.  
2::10::6::तत: after that, तानि those, चित्राणि of different colours, माल्यानि garlands, दिव्यानि divine (costly), आभरणानि च also the ornaments, कैकेय्या by Kaikeyi, अपविद्धानि thrown off, भूमिम् to the ground, प्रपेदिरे resorted.
2::10::7::तया by her, अपविद्धानि thrown away, तानि माल्यानि all those garlands, आभरणानि च and the ornaments also, नक्षत्राणि stars, नभ: the sky, यथा like, वसुधाम् the ground, अशोभयन्त adorned.
2::10::8::एकवेणीम् into a single braid, दृढम् tightly, बद्वा having fastened, क्रोधागारे in the chamber of wrath, निपतिता had fallen down, मलिनाम्बरा wearing soiled clothes, सा she, गतसत्त्वा in a lifeless state, किन्नरी इव like kinnari, बभौ shone.
2::10::9::महाराज: तु as regards the king, राघवस्य Rama's, अभिषेचनम् installation ceremony, आज्ञाप्य having issued orders, उपस्थानम् very close associates, अनुज्ञाप्य having taken leave, निवेशनम् the palace, प्रविवेश entered.
2::10::10::वशी one who has subdued the senses, अद्य today, रामाभिषेक: Rama's installation, प्रसिद्ध: इति is known to everybody, जज्ञिवान् having come to know, प्रियार्हाम् to me who deserves to hear such pleasant news (to Kaikeyi), प्रियम् pleasant news, आख्यातुम् to communicate, अन्त: पुरम् the inner apartment, विवेश entered.
2::10::11::महायशा: renowned, स: he, निशाकर: moon, पाण्डुराभ्रम् with pale clouds, राहुयुक्तम्  accompanied by Rahu, आकाशमिव like the sky, श्रेष्ठम् excellent, कैकेय्या: गृहम् Kaikeyi's abode, प्रविवेश entered. 
2::10::12::शुकबर्हिणसङ्घुष्टम् filled with parrots and peacocks, क्रौञ्चहंसरुतायुतम् full of cries of kraunchas and swans, वादित्ररवसङ्घुष्टम् echoing with the sounds of musical instruments, कुब्जा वामनिकायुतम् with hunchbacks and dwarfs (attendants moving here and there), चम्पकाशोकशोभितै: shining with champaka and ashoka trees, लतागृहै: by bowers surrounded with creepers, चित्रगृहै: च with picturegalleries, दान्तराजतसौवर्णवेदिकाभि: diases decorated with  ivory, gold and silver, समायुतम् filled with, नित्यपुष्पफलै: bearing flowers and fruits in all seasons, वृक्षै: (adorned) with trees, वापीभि: च with large pools, उपशोभितम् adorned, परमासनै: with excellent seats, विविधै: various kinds of, अन्नपानै: च  with food and drinks, भक्ष्यै: च eatables also, उपपन्नम् endowed with, भूषितै: decorations, महार्है: expensive, त्रिदिवोपमम् resembling heaven, पुरम़ृद्धिमत् prosperous abode, तत् that, स्वम् his own, अन्त: पुरम्  inner apartment, प्रविश्य having entered, महाराज: great king, राजा king (Dasaratha), शयनोत्तमे on  the best bed, प्रियाम् beloved, कैकेयीम् Kaikeyi, न ददर्श did not see.
2::10::13::कामबलसंयुक्त: charged with passion, स: मनुजाधिप: the king, रत्यर्थम् seeking carnal pleasure, दयिताम् beloved, भार्याम् wife, अपश्यन् not seeing, विषसाद dejected, पप्रच्छ च also enquired.
2::10::14::पुरा previously, देवी queen (Kaikeyi), तस्य his, तां वेलाम् time, न अत्यवर्तत हि did not transgress, राजा king, कदाचन never, शून्यम् empty, गृहम् apartment, न प्रविवेश च did not enter.
2::10::15::तत: then, गृहगत: having reached the apartment, राजा king, अपण्डिताम् foolish lady, कैकेयीम् about Kaikeyi, स्वार्थलिप्सुम् seeking selfish interest, अविज्ञाय without realising, यथापूर्वम् as usual, पर्यपृच्छत enquired.
2::10::16::अथ thereafter, सन्त्रस्ता frightened, प्रतीहरी doorkeeper, कृताञ्जलि: with folded palms, उवाच said, देव O monarch देवी queen, भृशम् कृद्वा mighty angry, क्रोधागारम् towards the chamber of wrath, अभिदृता swiftly went.
2::10::17::परमदुर्मना: deeply melancholic, राजा king, प्रतीहार्या door keeper's, वच: words, शृत्वा having heard, लुलितव्याकुलेन्द्रिय: with his senses agitated and unstable, पुन: again, भूय: still more, विषसाद grieved. 
2::10::18::जगतीपति: lord of the earth, स: he, तत्र there (in that chamber of wrath), पतिताम् fallen down, भूमौ on the floor, शयानाम् lying down, अतथोचिताम् unbecoming manner, ताम् her, अपश्यत् saw,  दु:खेन with grief, प्रतप्त: इव as if consumed. 
2::10::19::वृद्ध: aged, अपाप: guileless, स: he, तरुणीम् youthful lady, प्राणेभ्योऽपि more than his life, गरीयसीम् dearer, पापसङ्कल्पाम् a lady of sinful intentions, विनिष्कृत्ताम् severed, लतामिव like a creeper, पतिताम् fallen down, देवतामिव like a goddess, निर्धूताम् thrown down on earth, किन्नरीमिव like a 'kinnari', च्युताम् slipped (from heaven), अप्सरसं यथा like apsarasas, परिभ्रष्टाम् fallen down, मायामिव like illusion, संयताम् tied down, हरिणीमिव like a female deer, भार्याम् to wife, ददर्श saw.
2::10::20::वने in the forest, दिग्धेन by a poisoned arrow, विद्धाम् struck down, करेणुमिव like a sheelephant, ताम् her, अरण्ये in the forest, महागज: इव like a mighty elephant, स्नेहात् lovingly, परिममर्श caressed.
2::10::21::कामी passionate, अभिसन्त्रस्तचेतन: mind extremely terrified, कमलपत्राक्षीम् to one with eyes resembling lotuspetals, वनिताम् that woman, पाणिभ्याम् with both hands, परिमृश्य after caressing, इदम् this word, उवाच said.
2::10::22::देवि O queen आत्मनि in me, संश्रितम् taken refuge in (you), ते your, क्रोधम् about anger, अहम् I, न अभिजानामि am not able to know, केन by whom, अभिशप्ता असि are you cursed, केन वा or by whom, विमानिता असि are you disrespected, कल्याणि O auspicious one, पांसुषु in the dust, यत् शेषे since you lie, इदम् this, मम my, दु:खाय is the source of my sorrow.  
2::10::23::मयि in me, कल्याणचेतसि in a mind favourably disposed, त्वम् you, भूतोपहतचित्तेव like one possessed by evil spirits, मम my, चित्तप्रमाथिनी afflicting my mind, किमर्थम् why, भूमौ on the floor, शेषे are you lying down?
2::10::24::भामिनि O lovely one कुशला: experts, सर्वश: in every way, अभितुष्टा: च completely satisfied too, मे my, वैद्या: सन्ति physicians are available, त्वाम् you, सुखिताम् करिष्यन्ति will restore your health, व्याधिम् ailment, आचक्ष्व you may tell.
2::10::25::कस्य वा to whom, प्रियम् favour, ते by you, कार्यम् is to be done, केन वा by whom, विप्रियम् displeasure, कृतम् was done, क: who, अद्य now, प्रियम् favour, लभताम् let him obtain, को वा who, सुमहत् exceedingly great, अप्रियम् displeasure (shall obtain).
2::10::26::देवि O queen मा रोदी: do not weep, त्वम् you, संपरिशोषणम् emaciation of body, मा च कार्षी: do not cause, अवध्य: who should not be slain, को वा or who, वध्यताम् shall be slain, वध्य: worthy of being slain, को वा or who, विमुच्यताम् shall be released, दरिद्र: is poor, को वा or who, आढ्य: should be made rich, भवतु shall become, द्रव्यवान्वापि whosoever is wealthy, अकिञ्चन: shall be rendered poor.
2::10::27::अहं चैव I am also, मदीया: my relatives, सर्वे च all people, तव your, वशानुगा: under control, ते your, अभिप्रायम् opinion, किञ्चित् a little, व्याहन्तुम् to spoil, अहम् I, न उत्सहे will not make efforts.
2::10::28::अत्मन: my own, जीवितेनापि with life even, यत् whatever, मनसा with mind, इच्छसि wish, ब्रूहि tell, आत्मनि in your own self, बलम् strength, जानन्ती you know yourself, माम् me, शङ्कितुम् to doubt, न अर्हसि it does not behove you, सुकृतेनापि on my acquired merits, ते to you, शपे I swear, तव your, प्रीतिम् pleasure, करिष्यामि I will do.  
2::10::29::चक्रम् wheel of the chariot, यावत् till (such places), आवर्तते rotates, मे वसुन्धरा my land, तावती (is extended) up to that, प्राचीना: eastern regions, सिन्धुसौवीरा: SindhuSauvira areas, सौराष्ट्रा: Saurashtra, दक्षिणापथा: southern regions, वङ्गाङ्गमगधा: Banga, Anga, Magadha states, मत्स्या: Mathsya kingdom, काशिकोसला: Kasi and Kosala, समृद्धा: prosperous places.
2::10::30::तत्र there, धनधान्यम् wealth and food grains, अजाविकम् sheep and goats, बहु many, द्रव्यम् things, जातम् is produced, कैकेयि Kaikeyi, तत: from those, यद्यत् whichever, त्वम् you, मनसा  in mind, इच्छसि wish, वणीष्व ask.  
2::10::31::भीरु O lady, ते to you, आयासेन with exertion, किम् what is the use? शोभने O charming one, उत्तिष्ठ उत्तिष्ठ arise, arise, कैकेयि O Kaikeyi ते to you, यत: from whom, भयम् fear, आगतम् has come, तत् that, त्वम् you, मे me, ब्रूहि tell, ते your, तत् the cause for that fear, रश्मिवान् Sun, नीहारमिव like morning mist, व्यपनयिष्यामि I will dispel.  
2::10::32::तथा thus, उक्ता spoken to, सा she, समाश्वस्ता breathing a sigh of relief, तत् that, अप्रियम् unpleasant thing, वक्तुकामा intending to tell, भर्तारम् to her husband, भूयः still more,     परिपीडयितुम् for tormenting, उपचक्रमे started.
