2::103::1::Longing to see Rama, Vasistha, headed by the wives of Dasaratha, set out on foot (where Rama was offering libations).
2::103::2::The wives of the king while proceeding slowly towards the river Mandakini beheld the bathing place frequented by Rama and Lakshmana.
2::103::3::Kausalya, with eyes filled with tears and her face emaciated, addressing Sumitra and the other wives of the king sadly said:
2::103::4::This is a sacred place to the east of the forest used by the unfortunate Rama, and Lakshmana of untiring energy and Sita expelled from the country and undergoing suffering.
2::103::5::O Sumitra, your son Lakshmana, free from laziness, always carries water from here for the sake of my son.
2::103::6::Your son, though engaged in servile tasks (like bringing water), is not to be held contemptible because all the services intended for the benefit of his brother are prompted by virtue.
2::103::7::This your son unaccustomed to, and undeserving of, any suffering may now give up this mean and distressing duty entrusted to him.
2::103::8:: That largeeyed Kausalya beheld the cakes of ingudi pulp placed by Rama for his father on a spread of darbha grass whose blades pointed toward the south.
2::103::9::Seeing the pinda (edible offering made to the departed soul) placed on the ground for his father by the distressed Rama, queen Kausalya, addressing all the wives of Dasaratha, said:
2::103::10::Have darsan of this pinda offered by Rama according to tradition to his magnanimous father, Dasaratha, lord of the Ikshvaku race.
2::103::11::I do not think that this is an appropriate food for that godlike and great lord of the earth who enjoyed all luxury.
2::103::12::How can Indralike Dasaratha, having ruled the earth bounded by four oceans, eat a cake of ingudi pulp?
2::103::13::Rama (who was once) highly prosperous, had to offer the cake of ingudi pulp to his father. Nothing appears more painful to me than this in this world.
2::103::14:: Seeing the offering of cake of ingudi pulp by Rama to his father, how is it that my heart does not break into a thousand pieces in sorrow? 
2::103::15::The wellknown saying in this world is that 'whatever food a man partakes, his gods also partake the same'. This dictum appears true (now).
2::103::16::The cowives, having thus consoled the distressed Kausalya, went to the hermitage. There they beheld Rama who looked like a god dislodged from heaven.
2::103::17::Beholding Rama devoid of all luxury, his mothers afflicted with grief, and overcome with sorrow, cried aloud, tears streaming down.
2::103::18::Rama, the best among men and true to his promise, rose and touched the auspicious feet of all his mothers (in reverence).
2::103::19::Those largeeyed queens, their palms with delicate fingers and with auspicious hands with a pleasant touch, wiped the dust from the back of his body.
2::103::20::On seeing his mothers, Lakshmana, too, was overcome with grief and with devotion followed Rama and slowly bowed to them with reverence.
2::103::21::All the queens treated Lakshmana, born of Dasaratha and endowed with auspicious qualities, with the same love as they did to Rama.
2::103::22::Sita, too, overcome with grief, grasped the feet of her mothersinlaw and stood before them, her eyes full of tears.
2::103::23::Like a mother to her daughter, Kausalya embraced the wretched Sita, who was afflicted with sorrow, and emaciated due to her stay in the forest, and said to her:
2::103::24::How is it that Sita, daughter of Janaka, king of Videha, daughterinlaw of Dasaratha and wife of Rama, has to undergo such hardships in the lonely forest.
2::103::25::O Sita, after looking at your countenance, which is like a lotus, scorched by the sunshine, or like a withered waterlily or gold defiled by dust or the Moon obscured by the clouds, the fire of sorrow is burning my mind. The grief in my mind is like fire kindled from the arani (sacrificial faggots) that consumes its own souree. (On a circular wood piece, a wooden stick is placed and churned to produce fire specially in sacrifices is called arani.)
2::103::26::While Rama's mother was uttering such words in anguish, Rama reached Vasistha and clasped his feet with reverence.
2::103::27::Rama touched the feet of the family priest Vasistha, a man equivalent to effulgent fire like Indra, the lord of the gods, does to Brihaspati and sat down along with him.
2::103::28::After Vasistha and Rama sat down, righteous Bharata sat close to his elder brother. Behind him sat his companions, leading citizens, soldiers and righteous men. 
2::103::29::Beholding Rama attired like an ascetic but radiant with a majestic glow, the extremely valiant Bharata sat near him with folded palms like the great Indra purified by religious austerities sits near Brahma, the creator.
2::103::30::All noble people were truly filled with great curiosity as to what Bharata was going to speak, after paying his homage and honouring Rama.
2::103::31::Rama who was steadfast in truth, Lakshmana of great dignity and righteous Bharata surrounded by their friends were as resplendent as three sacrificial fires encircled by officiating priests.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्य्रुत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the one hundredthird sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
