2::114::1::महायशः renowned, प्रभुः lord, भरतः Bharata, स्निग्धगम्भीरघोषेण with its deep, soothing sound, स्यन्दनेन by the chariot, उपयान् while travelling, क्षिप्रम् soon, अयोध्याम् Ayodhya, प्रविवेश entered.
2::114::2:: बिडालोलूकचरिताम् ranged by cats and owls, आलीननरवारणाम् where people and elephants were out of sight, तिमीराभ्याहताम् enveloped in darkness, अप्रकाशाम् without light, कालीम्  black, निशामिव like night. 
2::114::3:: श्रिया with majesty, प्रज्वलितप्रभाम् radiating with lustre, अभ्युत्थितेन exalted, ग्रहेन by cruel planet, पीडिताम् tormented, राहुशत्रोः enemy of Rahu, (the Moon's), प्रियाम् beloved, पत्नीम् to wife, एकाम् alone, रोहिणीमिव like the star Rohini. 
2::114::4::अल्पोष्णक्षुब्धसलिलां with scant, hot and turbid waters, घर्मोत्तप्तविहङ्गमाम् the aquatic birds scorched by the Sun's heat, लीनमीनझषग्राहाम् small fish, large fish and crocodiles perished, कृशाम् dried up, गिरिनदीमिव like a mountainstream. 
2::114::5::विधूमाम् smokeless, हेमाभाम् with the splendour of gold, समुत्थिताम् rising, पश्चात् later on, हविरभ्युक्षिताम् sprinkled with sacrificial offering of clarified butter, विप्रलयम् extinction, गताम्  obtained, अध्वराग्नेः sacrificial fire's, शिखामिव like flames.
2::114::6::महाहवे in a great battle, विध्वस्तकवचाम् armours scattered, रुग्णगजवाजिरथध्वजाम् injured elephants, horses and shattered chariots and banners standards, हतप्रवीराम् with heroic warriors slain, आपन्नाम् in great distress, चमूमिव like the army. 
2::114::7::सफेनाम् filled with foam, सस्वनाम् भूत्वा with roaring sounds, समुत्थिताम् risen, प्रशान्तमारुतोद्धूताम् swept by the gentle breeze, निस्स्वनाम् silent, सागरस्य ocean's, जलोर्मिमिव like a wave. 
2::114::8::सर्वैः all, यज्ञायुधैः with sacrificial appliances, अभिरूपैः learned, याजकैः with priests, सुत्याकाले the time of extraction of Soma juice, विनिर्वृते has come to an end, त्यक्ताम् deserted, गतरवाम् sounds ceased, वेदिम् इव like an altar. 
2::114::9::गोवृषेण by a bull, परित्यक्ताम् forsaken, उत्सुकाम् longing (for the bull), गवाम् of cows, गोष्ठमध्ये in the midst of the herd, स्थिताम् standing, आर्ताम् despaired, नवं new, तृणम् grass, अचरन्तीं no longer grazing, पक्तिमिव like a cow.
2::114::10::सुस्निग्धै: by the most glossy, प्रज्वलद्भिरिव by the radiant, उत्तमैः by the excellent ones, जात्यैः by those of the finest class, प्रभाकराद्यैः rubies and other gems, मणिभिः with precious stones, वियुक्ताम् detached, नवाम् new, मुक्तावलीमिव like a pearl necklace.
2::114::11::पुण्यक्षयात् due to exhaustion of merit, स्थानात् from its place, सहसा suddenly, महीम् the earth, गताम् reached, संवृतद्युतिविस्ताराम् with its extensive lustre dimmed, दिवः from the earth, च्युताम् fallen, तारामिव like a star. 
2::114::12::वसन्तान्ते at the end of spring, द्रुतदावाग्नि विप्लुष्टाम् ravaged by the fastspreading forest fire, पुष्पनद्धाम् laden with flowers, मत्तभ्रमरनादिताम् with the melodious hum of intoxicated bees, क्लान्ताम् withered away, वनलतामिव like a woodland creeper. 
2::114::13::सम्मूढनिगमाम् dazed merchants, स्तब्धाम् stilled, संक्षिप्तविपणापणाम् with markets and shops closed, अम्बुधरैः with clouds, वृताम् covered, प्रच्छन्नशशिनक्षत्राम् obscuring the moon and stars, द्यामिव like the sky.
2::114::14::आकाशे lying in the open, क्षीणपानोत्तमैः with excellent wine exhausted, भग्नैः by the broken, शरावैः by pitchers, अभिसंवृताम् surrounded by, हताशौण्डाम् with drunkards dead, ध्वस्ताम् scattered, असंस्कृताम् uncleansed, पानभूमि इव like a drinking place. 
2::114::15::वृक्णभूमितलाम् surface riven, वृक्णपात्रैः with broken pots, समावृताम् scattered around, निम्नाम्  like a dale, उपयुक्तोदकाम् water used up, भग्नाम् broken, निपतिताम् sunken, प्रपामिव like a well. 
2::114::16::विपुलाम् extensive, वितताम् stretched, युक्तपाशाम् attached with nooses, तरस्विनाम् of a powerful man, बाणैः with arrows, विनिष्कृत्ताम् severed, आयुधात् from the weapon, भूमौ on the ground, पतिताम् fallen, ज्यामिव like a bowstring. 
2::114::17::युद्धशौण्डेन by a warrior skilled in warfare, हयारोहेण by the rider of a horse, सहसा suddenly, वाहिताम् carried, प्रतिसैन्येन by the enemy army, निहताम् slain, पातिताम् fallen on the ground, वडवामिव like a mare.
2::114::18:: शुष्कतोयाम् water dried up, बहुभिः a lot of, महामत्सैः with large fishes, कूर्मैश्च with tortoises, वृताम् filled, प्रभिन्नतटविस्तीर्णाम् vast area around the bank split, हृतोत्पलाम् waterlilies withered, वापीमिव like a circular reservoir of water. 
2::114::19:: प्रतिषिद्धानुलेपनां with no oil massaged (on the body), शोकेन with grief, सन्तप्ताम् scorched, अभूषणाम् without ornaments, अप्रहृष्टस्य in dejection, पुरुषस्य man's, गात्रयष्टिमिव body like a stick (skeletal).
2::114::20::प्रविगाढायाम् deep, पावृषि in the rainy season, अभ्रमण्डलम् orb of clouds, प्रविष्टस्य entered, भास्करस्य the Sun's, नीलजीमूतैः by black clouds, प्रच्छन्नाम् obscured, प्रभामिव like the radiance. 
2::114::21:: श्रीमान् illustrious, दशरथात्मजः son of Dasaratha, भरतस्तु Bharata, रथस्थस्सन् seated in the chariot, रथश्रेष्ठम् the most excellent of chariots, वाहयन्तम् driving, सारथिम् to the charioteer, वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::114::22::अयोध्यायाम् In Ayodhya, अद्य now, यथापुरम् as in the past, गम्भीरः deep, मूर्छितः allpervasive, गीतवादित्रनिस्वनः songs and sounds of musical instruments, न निशम्यते are not heard, किं नु खलु what could be the reason? 
2::114::23::वारुणीमदगन्धश्च the intoxicating odour of spirituous liquor, माल्यगन्धश्च the fragrance of flower garlands, धूपितागरुगन्धश्च the fragrance of agaru or incense, समन्ततः everywhere, मूर्छितः pervading, न प्रवाति does not blow.
2::114::24::रामे Rama, विवासिते having been exiled, इदानीम् now, अस्यां पुर्याम् in this city, यानप्रवरघोषश्च clatter of excellent carriages, स्निग्धः pleasant, हयनिस्वनश्च neighing of horses, प्रमत्तगजनादश्च trumpeting of elephants in rut, महान् great, रथनिस्वनः च rattle of chariots, न श्रूयते are not heard. 
2::114::25:: रामे Rama, गते having departed, तरुणाः the young men, संतप्ताः distressed, चन्दनागरुगन्धांश्च   incense of agaru and sandalwood paste, महार्हा: expensive, नवस्रजश्च garlands of fresh flowers, नोपभुञ्जते do not enjoy. 
2::114::26:: रामशोकार्दिते stricken with grief on account of separation from Rama, पुरे in the city, नराः men, चित्रमाल्यधराः wearing garlands of variegated flowers, बहिः outside, यात्राम् pleasure jaunts, न गच्छन्ति do not go, उत्सवाः festivites, न सम्प्रवर्तन्ते are not celebrated. 
2::114::27::अस्य पुरस्य of this city, द्युतिः splendour, मम my, भ्रात्रा सह along with brother, गता had left, नूनम् certainly, इयम् this, अयोध्या Ayodhya, सासारा with rain pouring down, अर्जुनी relating to the waning Moon, क्षपा इव like night, न राजति हि does not gleam.
2::114::28:: मे भ्राता my brother, महोत्सव इव like a carnival, आगतः having returned, ग्रीष्मे in summer, अम्बुदः इव like clouds, अयोध्यायाम् in Ayodhya, हर्षम् delight, कदा when, जनयिष्यति नु खलु  will cause.
2::114::29:: अयोध्यायाम् in Ayodhya, महापथाः highways, चारुवेषैः by those elegantly attired, उन्नतगामिभिः with their majestic gait, सम्पतद्भिः by those coming together in groups, तरुणैः young men, नरैः men, नाभिभान्ति is not shining.
2::114::30:: एवम् thus, बहुविधम् in several ways, जल्पन् talking, तेन by that, नरेन्द्रेण by the king, हीनाम् bereft of, सिंहहीनाम् without a lion, गुहामिव like a cave, पितुः father's, वसतिम् residence,  विवेश entered. 
2::114::31:: तदा then, आत्मवान् selfpossessed, भरतः Bharata, सुरैः by gods, उत्सृष्टम् deprived of, अभास्करम् without the Sun, दिनमिव like a day, उञ्झितप्रभम् shorn of splendour, विविक्तम् secluded, सर्वम् entire, तत् अन्तःपुरम् that inner apartment, निरीक्ष्य having seen, बाष्पम्  tears in distress, मुमोच shed. 
