2::108::1::While Rama, conversant with dharma, was consoling Bharata, Jabali an eminent brahmin addressed him in words contrary to righteousness.
2::108::2::Very well, O scion of the Raghu race, you are nobleminded and highsouled. You, like a common man, must not entertain such nonsensical thought.
2::108::3::Who is whose friend? who is to get what and from whom? Man is born alone and will die alone. 
2::108::4::O Rama one who establishes relationship by saying, 'She is my mother he is my father' is to be regarded as a lunatic. In fact, no one belongs to any one. 
2::108::5::A man who goes from one village to another takes rest somewhere on the way and the next day leaves the place and proceeds on his journey. Similarly, father, mother, home and wealth are restingplaces to a man. The wise do not get attached to them, O descendant the Kakutsthas 
2::108::6::O most virtuous of men, you ought not to abandon this patrimonial kingdom, adopt a course, which is painful, difficult and full of thorns (dangers). This (course) is unwise and unworthy of you.
2::108::7::Go back to that prosperous city of Ayodhya and get yourself coronated. That city is a chaste woman wearing a single braid of hair awaiting you, her lord.
2::108::8:: O king's son, enjoy inestimable royal pleasures in the city of Ayodhya like Indra in heaven.
2::108::9::Dasaratha was nobody to you and you are nobody to him. That king is one person and you are another. Therefore, do what I tell you. (It does not matter what you are to him and what he means to you).
2::108::10::For a living being, the father is only a drop of white blood (semen). During her menstrual period this is blended in the mother's womb due to which a man is born in this world.
2::108::11::That king (Dasaratha) has gone to the place where he ought to go. Such is the nature of mortals. You are fruitlessly undergoing difficulties.
2::108::12::I prity those who yearn for dharma and artha and not for other things since those who have experienced adversities in this world (disregarding their own interest), will be ultimately destroyed any way by death.
2::108::13::People perform ashtaka ceremony for the spirits of ancestors and offer them food. Look at the amount of food being wasted. Will the dead (ever) eat food?
2::108::14::If something eaten by one in this world can enter the body of another, then a shraddha can be performed for a person who has set out on a distant journey. Will that offering turn into food for him on his way?
2::108::15::It was to induce people to give charity that treatises are composed by intelligent men exhorting, 'perform sacrifices', 'give charity', 'be initiated', 'practise religious austerities', 'renounce', etc.
2::108::16::O highminded one thinking that the next world does not exist, practise whichever is evident and perceivable. And turn your back on what is beyond perception.
2::108::17::Honour the decision of the wise that serves as an instance to all and accept the kingdom offered by Bharata with pleasureइत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे अष्टोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the one hundredeighth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
