2::41::1::पुरुषव्याघ्रे tiger (foremost) among men, तस्मिन् that Rama, कृताञ्जलौ with folded palms, विनिर्याति having departed, अन्तःपुरे in the inner apartment (of the palace), स्त्रीणाम् of women, आर्तशब्दः cries of distress, संजज्ञे arose.
2::41::2::अनाथस्य of the orphan, दुर्बलस्य of the weak, तपस्विनः of the miserable, अस्य जनस्य of these people, यः who, गतिः refuge, शरणं च also the protector, आसीत्  was, सः नाथः such protector, क्व नु गच्छति where is he now going? 
2::41::3::अभिशप्तोऽपि even when denounced, न क्रुध्यति will not be angry, क्रोधनीयानि acts provoking wrath, वर्जयन् while  abandoning, क्रुद्धान् those who were enraged, सर्वान् all of them, प्रसादयन् pacifies, समदुःखः sharing their sorrow, क्व where, गच्छति is going? 
2::41::4::महातेजाः effulgent, यः Rama, मातरि with regard to his mother, कौशल्यायाम् Kausalya, यथा as, वर्तते treats, तथा in that way, अस्मासु in us, वर्तते treats, महात्मा a magnanimous  one, क्व नु where, गच्छति is he going? 
2::41::5::कैकेय्या by Kaikeyi, क्लिश्यमानेन by being tormented, राज्ञा by the king, वनम् to the forest, सञ्चोदितः one ordered, अस्य जनस्य of these people, जगतः of the whole world, परित्राता protector, Rama, क्व नु where, गच्छति is he going?
2::41::6::राजा king, निश्चेतनः nonsense, अहो alas, जीवलोकस्य of the world of living beings, सम्प्रियम् is dear, धर्म्यम् is righteous, सत्यव्रतम् faithful to truth, रामम् Rama, वनवासे to dwell in the forest, प्रवत्स्यति is sending away.
2::41::7::इति thus, सर्वाः all, ताः महिष्यः all the wives, विवत्साः deprived of their calfs, धेनवः इव like cows, दुःखार्ताः tormented with sorrow, रुरुदुश्चैव wept, सस्वरम् loudly, विचुक्रुशुः cried.
2::41::8::पुत्रशोकाभिसन्तप्तः oppressed with sorrow caused by the departure of his son, सः महीपतिः that king, अन्तःपुरे in the inner apartment (of the palace), घोरम् horible, तम् that, आर्त शब्दम्  wailings, श्रुत्वा having heard, सुदुःखितः आसीत् became increasingly distressed.
2::41::9::अग्निहोत्राणि (Fire) in agnihotra sacrifice, नाहूयन्त was not invoked, गृहमेधिनः householders, नापचन् did not cook, प्रजाः people, कार्यम् daily chores, न अकुर्वन् did not do, सूर्यश्च even the Sun, अन्तरधीयत also obscured. 
2::41::10::नागाः elephants, कबलान् mouthful of food, व्यसृजन् shed, गावः cows, वत्सान् calves, न पाययन् did not suckle, जननी mothers, प्रथमजम् to the firstborn, पुत्रम् son, लब्धवा having begotten, नाभ्यनन्दत were not pleased.
2::41::11::त्रिशङ्कु: Trishanku, लोहिताङ्गश्च Mars, बृहस्पतिबुधावपि Jupiter as also Mercury, दारुणाः fierce aspect, सर्वे all, ग्रहाः planets, सोमम् Moon, अभ्येत्य approaching, व्यवस्थिताः remained.
2::41::12::नक्षत्राणि the constellation of stars, गतार्चींषि shorn of their radiance, ग्रहाश्च planets also, गततेजसः diminished  their brilliance, विशाखास्तु as for Visakha stars, सधूमाः with smoke, नभसि in the sky, प्रचकाशिरे were shining.
2::41::13::महोदधिः great ocean, कालिकानिलवेगेन इव like windblown dark clouds, उत्थितः aroused, रामे Rama, वनम् to the forest, प्रव्रजिते having been exiled, तत् नगरम् that city (of Ayodhya), प्रचचाल was shaken.
2::41::14::सर्वाः all, दिशः cardinal points, पर्याकुलाः agitated, तिमिरेण with darkness, संवृताः इव covered, ग्रहः planet, न प्रचकाशे did not shine, नक्षत्रमपि even stars, किञ्चन anything, न not shining.
2::41::15::सर्वः all, नागरः relating to the city, जनः people, अकस्मात् suddenly, दैन्यम् helplessness, उपागमत् obtained, आहारे वा either in nourishment, विहारे वा or in recreation, कश्चित् none, मनः their mind, न अकरात् not done.
2::41::16::अयोध्यायाम् in Ayodhya, सर्वः all, जनः people, शोकपर्यायसन्तप्तः afflicted with a series of grief, सततम् always, दीर्घम् deeply, उच्छवसन् heaving, जगतीपतिम् the lord of the world, शुशोच bewailed. 
2::41::17::राजमार्गगतः in the royal highway, जनः people, बाष्पपर्याकुलमुखः faces full of tears, कश्चित् any body, हृष्टः happy, न लक्ष्ययते could not be seen, सर्वः all, शोकपरायणः was plunged in sorrow.
2::41::18::पवनः wind, शीतः cool, न वाति does not blow, शशी Moon, सौम्यदर्शनः with pleasant appearance, न not, सूर्यः Sun, लोकम् the world, न तपते did not warm, सर्वम्  entire, जगत् world, पर्याकुलम् was agitated.
2::41::19::सुताः sons, भर्तारः husbands, स्त्रीणाम् towards women, अनर्थिनः had no concern, तथा similarly, भ्रातरः brothers, अनर्थिनः had no mutual interest, सर्वे all, सर्वम् everything, परित्यज्य having deserted, राममेव about Rama only, अन्वचिन्तयन् they thought.
2::41::20::तदा then, रामस्य Rama's, ये सुहृदः those friends, ते सर्वे all of them, मूढचेतसः bewildered, शोकभारेण with burden of sorrow, आक्रान्ताः afflicted, शयनम् couches, न जहुः did not leave.
2::41::21:: ततः thereafter, पुरन्दरेण by Indra, रहिता without, सपर्वता with mountains, महीव like earth, महात्मना magnanimous Rama, रहिता without, अयोध्या Ayodhya, भयशोकपीडिता agitated by fear and sorrow, घोरम् dreadfully, चचाल had shaken, सनागयोधाश्वगणा filled with hosts of  warriors, elephants and horses, ननाद च made sounds.
