2::96::1::मैथिलीम् princess of Mithila, तां सीताम् to Sita, तथा in that way, गिरिनिम्नगाम्  mountainriver, दर्शयित्वा having shown, मांसेन with meat, छन्दयन् gratifying, गिरिप्रस्थे on the mountainslope, निषसाद sat. 
2::96::2::धर्मात्मा righteous, स राघवः that Rama, इदम् this, मेध्यम् sacred meat, इदम् this, स्वादु is savoury, इदम् this one, अग्निना with fire, निष्टप्तम् roasted, एवम् uttering this way, सीतया सह in the company of Sita, आस्ते was seated.
2::96::3::तथा thus, तस्य that Rama, तत्र there, आसतः while sitting, उपयायिनः approaching, भरतस्य Bharata's, सैन्यरेणुश्च dust raised by the army, शब्दश्च and tumult, नभस्पृशौ both reaching   the sky, प्रादुरास्ताम् was generated. 
2::96::4::एकस्मिन् अन्तरे meanwhile, मत्ताः mighty, यूथपाः leaders of elephantherds, महता with a loud, शब्देन noise, त्रस्ताः were frightened, अर्दिताः agitated सयूथाः with herds, ततः from there, दिशः in different directions, दुद्रुवुः fled away. 
2::96::5::सः राघवः that Rama, सैन्यसमुद्बूतम् generated by the army, तं शब्दम् that sound, शुश्राव heard, विप्रद्रुतान् fleeing, तान् those, सर्वान् all, यूथपान् च leaders of herds, अन्ववैक्षत saw.
2::96::6::रामः Rama, विद्रुवतः running, तान् them, दृष्ट्वा having seen, तम् them, निस्वनं also sound, श्रुत्वा having heard, दीप्ततेजसम् blazing with energy, सौमित्रिम् son of Sumitra, लक्ष्मणम् addressing Lakshmana, उवाच said.
2::96::7::हन्त Oh what a wonder, लक्ष्मण Lakshmana, सुमित्रा Sumitra, त्वया by you, सुप्रजाः has a worthy son, इह here, भीमस्तनितगम्भीरः fearful rumbling of clouds, तुमुलः tumultous, स्वनः sound, इह here, श्रूयते is being heard, पश्य see. 
2::96::8::अरण्ये in the forest, गजयूथानि herds of elephants, महावने in the great woods, महिषाः वा buffaloes, मृगाः wild beasts, वित्रासिताः frightened, सिंहैः by lions, सहसा quickly, दिशः in directions, प्रद्रुताः running. 
2::96::9::सौमित्रे O Lakshmana, राजा वा king or, राजपुत्रो वा or prince, वने in the forest, मृगयाम् अटते  is hunting, वा or, किञ्चित् any, अन्यत् other, श्वापदम् ferocious animal, ज्ञातुम् to know, अर्हसि ought to
2::96::10::लक्ष्मण O Lakshmana, अयम् this, गिरिः mountain, पक्षिणामपि even to birds, सुदुश्चरः is highly inaccessible, एतत् सर्वम् all this, यथातत्त्वम् exactly, अचिरात् quickly, ज्ञातुम् to know, अर्हसि ought to. 
2::96::11::सः लक्ष्मणः that Lakshmana, सन्त्वरितः hurriedly, पुष्पितम् flowering, सालम् Sala tree, आरुह्य  climbing, सर्वाः all, दिशः directions, प्रेक्षमाणः seeing, पूर्वं दिशम् the eastern direction, उदैक्षत looked. 
2::96::12::उदङ्मुखः facing the north, प्रेक्षमाणः seeing, रथाश्वगजसम्बाधाम् with chariots, elephants and horses, यत्तै: wellequipped, पदातिभिः with infantry, युक्ताम् consisting of, महतीम् vast, चमूम् army, ददर्श beheld. 
2::96::13::अश्वगजसम्पूर्णाम् full of horses and elephants, रथध्वजविभूषिताम् decorated with chariotbannars, तां सेनाम् of the army, रामाय to Rama, शशंस informed, इदम् these, वचनं च words also, अब्रवीत् said.
2::96::14::आर्यः O noble one, अग्निम् sacredfires (Agnihotra), संशमयतु put off, सीता च Sita also, गुहाम् cave, भजताम् let take refuge, चापम् bow, सज्यम् with string, कुरुष्व make ready, तथा so also, शरांश्च arrows also, कवचम् armour (put on).
2::96::15::पुरुषव्याघ्रः best among men, रामः Rama, तं लक्ष्मणम् to Lakshmana, प्रत्युवाच ह replied so, अङ्ग Oh, सौमित्रे Lakshmana, अवेक्षस्व look, इमाम् this, चमूम् army, कस्य of whom, मन्यसे do you think.
2::96::16::रामेण by Rama, एवं in that manner, उक्तः having been said, लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, पावको यथा like a fire, रुषितः was wrathful, तां सेनाम् that army, दिधक्षन्निव as if he wanted to burn down, वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::96::17::कैकेय्याः Kaikeyi's, सुतः son, भरतः Bharata, अभिषेचनम् प्राप्य having been consecrated, राज्यम् kingdom, सम्पन्नम् endowed with prosperity (without obstacles), इच्छन् desiring, आवाम् both of us, हन्तुम् to slay, समभ्येति is coming, व्यक्तम् this is evident. 
2::96::18::एषः this, सुमहान् lofty, श्रीमान् majestic, उद्गतस्कन्धः atop with large trunk, विटपी tree, सम्प्रकाशते रथे on chariot, कोविदारध्वजः with his standard bearing the emblem of Kovidara tree, विराजति shining brilliantly.
2::96::19::सुमहास्कन्धः of very large trunk, विटपी च spread with many branches, असौ this, महाद्रुमः   large tree, कोविदारध्वजः standard of Kovidara, रथे on chariot, महासैन्ये in large army, विराजते is shining brilliantly.
2::96::20::एते these, यथाकामम् at their will, शीघ्रगान् swiftlymoving, अश्वान् horses, आरुह्य having mounted, भजन्ति are following, एते these, सादिनः riders of elephants, गजान् elephants, आरुह्य having mounted, संहृष्टाः cheerfully, भ्राजन्ति are shining. 
2::96::21::वीर O mighty warrior, आवाम् both of us, गृहीतधनुषौ by taking up the bows, गिरिम् on this  mountain, श्रयावहै take refuge, अथवा or, सन्नद्धौ fully prepared (for battle), उद्यतायुधौ with weapons in readiness, इहैव here itself, तिष्ठावः stay here. 
2::96::22::राघव O Rama, रणे in battle, कोविदारध्वजः Kovidara banner, नौ our, वशम् possession, अप्यागच्छेत् will it come, यत्कृते on whose account, त्वया by you, सीतया by Sita, तथा also, मया च by me, महत् great, व्यसनम् calamity, सम्प्राप्तम् has befallen, such, भरतम् Bharata, अपि द्रक्ष्यामि can I see. 
2::96::23::हे वीर O mighty warrior, राघव Rama, भवान् you, यन्निमित्तम् on whose account, शाश्वतात्   from the perpetual, राज्यात् from kingdom, च्युतः deprived, अयम् such, सम्प्राप्तः has come here, अरिः foe, भरतः Bharata, मे to me, वध्य एव deserves to be slain.
2::96::24::राघव O Rama, भरतस्य Bharta's, वधे in slaying, अहम् I, दोषम्  wrong, न पश्यामि do not see, पूर्वापकारिणम् one who has done harmful act earlier, हत्वा in slaying, अधर्मेण with unrighteousness, न युज्यते is not attached.
2::96::25::राघव O Rama, भरतः Bharata, पूर्वापकारी had done harm earlier, त्यक्तधर्मश्च abandoned righteousness, एतस्मिन् when such a person, निहते after having been slain कृत्स्नाम् the whole, वसुन्धराम् earth, अनुशाधि you shall rule.
2::96::26::राज्यकामुका greedy for the kingdom, कैकेयी Kaikeyi, अद्य today, संख्ये in a battle, मया by me, हतम् slain, पुत्रम् son, हस्तिभग्नम् felled by an elephant, द्रुमम् इव like a tree, सुदुःखार्ता extremely afflicted, पश्येत् let her see.
2::96::27::सानुबन्धाम् with her attendants, सबान्धवाम् with her relations, कैकेयीं च also Kaikeyi, वधिष्यामि will slay, अद्य today, मेदिनी the earth, महता by a great, कलुषेण of the sin, परिमुच्यताम् let it  be cleansed.
2::96::28::मानद O protector of honour (Rama), संयतम् suppressed, इमम् this, क्रोधम् anger, असत्कारं च dishonour, हुताशनम् fire, कक्षेष्विव like a thicket, अद्य today, शत्रुसैन्येषु in the army of enemies, मोक्ष्यामि I shall release. 
2::96::29::अद्य today, निशितैः by the sharpened, शरैः with arrows, शत्रुशरीराणि bodies of enemies, छिन्दन् rending, चित्रकूटस्य Chitrakuta's, एतत् काननम् this forest, शोणितोक्षितम् spattered with blood, करिष्ये I shall do. 
2::96::30::शरैः with arrows, निर्भिन्नहृदयान् with hearts transfixed, कुञ्जरान् elephants, तथा and, तुरगान् horses, मया by me, निहतान् killed, नरांश्च also men, श्वापदाः also wild beasts, परिकर्षन्तु let them drag off. 
2::96::31::अस्मिन् in this, महावने great forest, अहम् I, ससैन्यम् with army, भरतम् Bharata, हत्वा having slain, शराणाम् of the arrows, धनुषश्च of the bow, अनृणः discharging my debt, भविष्यामि shall become, संशंयः doubt, न not. 
