2::32::1::Lakshmana having understood the very auspicious and welcome order (of Rama)  immediately  proceeded to the house of Suyajna. 
2::32::2::Lakshmana paid homage to him who was in the firesanctuary, and said O friend, come and see the palace of Rama who is the accomplisher of all difficult tasks.
2::32::3::After performing the twilight prayers, Suyajna along with Lakshmana went straight away and entered the beautiful and prosperous palace of Rama.  
2::32::4::On the arrival of sage Suyajna wellversed in the Vedas, both Rama and Sita offered obeisance to him as to firegod and circumambulated him.
2::32::5::Rama, scion of the Kakutstha dynasty, worshipped Suyajna with a collection of golden ornaments such as earrings, anklets, armlets, bracelets and many other ornaments of precious stones. Then urged by Sita, Rama said to him:
2::32::6::O handsome friend now Sita intends to give away to your wife her necklace, her golden chain and girdle. Could you accept them?
2::32::7::Sita is departing for the forest and offers your wife her armlets, wonderful and elegant  bracelets.
2::32::8::Sita also wishes to give away a couch with an exquisite cover, encrusted with a variety of precious stones.
2::32::9::I am gifting you, O best among brahmins a thousand elephants including Satrunjaya an elephant my maternal uncle had given me. 
2::32::10:: Thus addressed by Rama, Suyajna accepted the gifts and conferred auspicious blessings on Rama, Lakshmana and Sita.
2::32::11::Sweettongued Rama calmly said to his brother (Lakshmana) like Brahma addressing Indra:
2::32::12:: O Lakshmana invite Agastya and Kausika, the two celebrated brahmins, and bestow on them with reverence plenty of precious gems like showers of rain on standing crops. 
2::32::13::Satisfy them, O highlyarmed Lakshmana, O bestower of honour with a thousand cows, gold, silver and with the great wealth of gems.
2::32::14::O Lakshmana, give away chariots, maidservants, silk clothes to learned brahmins of Taittiriya branch and wellversed in the Vedas, to agreeable and faithful brahmins attending on Kausalya with their blessings till they are fully satisfied.
2::32::15::Noble counsellor (of our father) and charioteer Chitraratha has been in our service for many years. Gratify him with invaluable jewels, clothes, wealth, with young female calves and a thousand cows.
2::32::16::O Lakshmana many brahmacharis with a staff (as a mark of religious authority) wellversed in Katha and Kalapa portions of the Vedas engaged daily in the study of the Vedas and nothing else. Not active otherwise, they are fond of delicious food and are respected even by great people. Give them eighty carts filled with gems, a thousand bulls capable of carrying paddy, and two hundred oxen capable of  ploughing land and a thousand cows for preparing food (with milk products).
2::32::17:: Give each of the large number of brahmacharis wearing girdles and working under Kausalya a thousand (cows or gold coins), O Lakshmana
2::32::18:: You should, O Lakshmana treat all those brahmins in such a way that my mother shall be pleased on seeing my respectful offerings.
2::32::19:: Thereupon Lakshmana, a tiger among men, personally distributed like Kubera, gifts of riches to all those Indras among brahmins (best of brahmins) in accordance with the instructions of Rama. 
2::32::20:: Rama then bestowed abundant wealth on each of the dependents as they stood with their throats choked with tears, saying:
2::32::21:: Till I come back, guard each of the palaces of Lakshmana and mine and ensure that they are not left unattended.
2::32::22:: Having spoken thus to all dependents who were overcome with grief, Rama ordered the  treasury officer to bring the entire treasure.  
2::32::23::When all the dependents fetched the entire wealth of Rama, they were pleased to see the great heap of wealth. 
2::32::24:: Rama, best among men, got the entire wealth distributed among indigent brahmins, and young and old alike with the help of Lakshmana.
2::32::25::A brahmin by name, Trijata, a descendant of sage Garga and of reddishbrown colour used to live in that region earning his livelihood in the forest by digging the earth with an ironspade and a plough.
2::32::26:: His young wife, highly distressed due to poverty, keeping her young sons before her said to the aged brahmin: 
2::32::27:: Listen to me throw away this ironspade. Go and see the righteous Rama.You may obtain something.
2::32::28:: At the words of his wife, Trijata took the path to Rama's palace, having wrapped  himself with a torn upper garment .
2::32::29::No one in the crowd stopped Tirjata until he reached the fifth courtyard as he looked like Bhrigu and Angirasa in brilliance.
2::32::30:: Trijata approached Rama and said O illustrious prince I am a destitute and have many children. I am  living in the forest by collecting leftover grains. Look at me. 
2::32::31::Rama jokingly replied to him, I have not yet gifted one thousand cows. Throw your staff and the cows on the space your staff covers will be yours.
2::32::32::Bewildered Trijata swiftly tightened up his upper garment around his waist, set the direction for his staff and hurled it with all his might. 
2::32::33::The staff he hurled crossed the bank of the river Sarayu and fell near a bull in the midst of a thousands cows. 
2::32::34::The virtuous Rama embraced Trijata, and despatched all the cattle extending up to the bank of Sarayu to his hermitage.
2::32::35:: Afterwards Rama sought to placate Trijata, that descendant of Ganga, saying: This was a joke. Do not be angry.   
2::32::36::Your power is unsurpassable and to ascertain this, I incited you to do this act. If there is anything else, ask for it.  
2::32::37::Truly speaking, there is no limit to seeking wealth. My wealth is specifically meant for brahmins. By distributing all the wealth earned by me, I get pleasure and renown. 
2::32::38::Thereafter that great sage Trijata along with his wife, immensely happy to receive multitudes of cows, pronounced blessings on the magnanimous Rama for glory, power, pleasure and prosperity.
2::32::39::Prompted by the deserving words of acclaim from his friends, Rama distributed with joy and without delay the entire wealth earned by him through dharma.
2::32::40::Thus there was none among those brahmins, attendants, poor people, and beggars, who was not satisfied with the honour (received) or with the charity.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्वात्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtysecond sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
