2::23::1::रामे when Rama, इति like this, ब्रुवति was speaking, श्रुत्वा having heard, लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, अधश्शिरा: with his head down, मनसा in his mind, मुहुः repeatedly, दुःखहर्षयो: in grief and joy, मध्यम् midway, जगामेव as if entered.
2::23::2::नरर्षभः best  among men (Lakshmana), तदा तु then, भ्रुवो: brows, मध्ये in between, भ्रुकुटीम्   a frown, बध्द्वा having knitted, बिलस्थः in its hole, रोषितः seized with anger, महासर्पः great serpent, इव like, निशश्वास hissed.
2::23::3::तदा then, दुष्प्रतिवीक्षम् frightening to look at, भ्रुकुटी सहितम् with frown, तत् that, तस्य his, मुखम् face, क्रुद्धस्य of angry ones, सिंहस्य of a lion, सदृशम् similar, बभौ shone.
2::23::4::हस्ती elephant, आत्मनः its own, हस्तम् इव like its trunk, अग्रहस्तम् forearm, विधुन्वन् shaking, शिरोधराम् neck, शरीरे in the body, तिर्यक् horizontally, ऊर्ध्वंच upward, पातयित्वा casting, अग्राक्ष्णा with pointed look, भ्रातरम् to brother, तिर्यक् obliquely, वीक्षमाणः looking, अब्रवीत् said.
2::23::5::शौण्डीर क्षत्रियर्षभ great among brave kshatriyas, यस्य whose, धर्मदोषप्रसङ्गेन (your) stand that harm will be done to  righteousness, लोकस्य of the world, अनतिशङ्कया apprehending verdict in favour of exile, अस्थाने at improper time, अयम् this, सुमहान् great, सम्भ्रमः haste, जातः वै was born, त्वद्विधः men such as you are, असम्भ्रान्तः without apprehension, अशौण्डीरम् devoid of strength, दैवम् destiny, यथा as, एतत् all this, कथम् how, वक्तुम् to tell, अर्हति is fit for you.
2::23::6::कृपणम् pitiable, अशक्तम् powerless, दैवम् destiny, किम् नाम what for, अभिशंससि you are extoling, पापयोः of two vicious people, तयोः of both of them, ते to you, शङ्का apprehension, कथं नाम how, न विद्यते does not arise.
2::23::7::धर्मात्मन् O virtuous one, शाठ्यात् perfidiously, स्वार्थम् for selfish ends, सुचरितम् of good conduct, परिजिहीर्षतोः for both of them repudiating, तयोः of both of them, श्लक्ष्णाः soft ones, धर्मोपधा acts of deception in the guise of righteousness, सन्ति exist, किं why, न बुध्यसे do you not know.
2::23::8::राघव O Rama, प्रागेव even before, तयोः their own, व्यवसितम् decision, एवम् in this way, न स्याद्धि if it was not like that, प्रकृतः by nature, सः that, वरः boon, प्रागेव दत्तः स्यात् would have been given long before.
2::23::9::वीर O valiant one, लोकविद्विष्टम् universally detested, आरब्धम् commenced, त्वदन्यस्य any one other than you, अभिषेचनम् consecration, सहितुम् to tolerate, नोत्सहे I do not desire, तत्र in this matter, मे to me, क्षन्तुम् pardon, अर्हसि it behoves you.
2::23::10::महामते O nobleminded one, येन by which, तव your, (इदम् this), बुद्धि: intellect, द्वैधम् dilemma, आगता attained, यस्य whose, प्रसङ्गात् concern, मुह्यसि you are deluded, सः धर्मः that righteousness, मम to me, द्वेष्यः deserve to be hated.
2::23::11::कर्मणा by your act, शक्तः being powerful, त्वम् you, कैकेयीवशवर्तिनः who is under the influence of Kaikeyi, पितुः father's, अधर्मिष्ठम् unjustifiable, विगर्हितम् contemptible, वाक्यम् words, कथम् how, करिष्यसि can you carry out?
2::23::12::अयम् this, भेदः treachery, किल्बिषात् out of guilty mind, कृतोऽपि even done, एवम् in this way, न गृह्यते यदि is not taken in its right sense, तत्र in that matter, मे to me, दुःखम् grief, जायते is arising, धर्मसङ्गश्च attachment to virtue, गर्हितः is censurable.
2::23::13::कामवृत्तयोः of both steeped in passion, नित्यम् always, अहितयोः of both hostile, पित्रभिधानयोः known as parents, शत्र्वोः enemies, कामम् passion, त्वम् you, मनसा अपि even in mind, कथम् how, कुर्याः will you carry out?
2::23::14::तयोः of both of them, प्रतिपत्ति: dictates, दैवी च is the decree of destiny, ते your, मतं यद्यपि even if it is your opinion, तथापि even then, तदपि that one also, ते to you, उपेक्षणीयम् should be ignored, न रोचते it does not please me.
2::23::15::यः who, विक्लबः timid, वीर्यहीनः weak, सः that one, दैवम् the destiny, अनुवर्तते follows, सम्भावितात्मानः respected souls, वीराः the valiant, दैवम् destiny, न पर्युपासते do not depend upon.
2::23::16::यः पुरुषः such a  man, पुरुषकारेण with human effort, दैवम् destiny, प्रबाधितुम् to strike,  समर्थः is capable, सः he, दैवेन by destiny, विपन्नार्थः with defeated objectives, न अवसीदति will not grieve.
2::23::17::अद्य today, दैवस्य destiny's, पुरुषस्य च also man's, पौरुषम् power, द्रक्ष्यन्ति will see, अद्य today, दैवमानुषयोः of destiny and man, व्यक्तिः difference, व्यक्ता will manifest, भविष्यति will become.
2::23::18::अद्य today, ते your, राज्याभिषेचनम् installation as heirapparent, यद्दैवात् by which divinity, आहतम् as prevented, दृष्टम् has been seen, दैवम् destiny, अद्य today, जनाः people, मत्पौरुषहतम् defeated by my valour, द्रक्ष्यन्ति वै shall witness.
2::23::19::अहम् I, अत्यङ्कुशम् unmanageable by the goad, उद्दामम् unrestrained, मदबलोद्धतम् uncontrollable through the strongth of nut, प्रधावितम् running away, गजम् इव like an elephant, दैवम् destiny, पौरुषेण with valour, निवर्तये I will turn back.
2::23::20::अद्य today, ते those, समस्ताः all, लोकपालाः guardians of the quarters, रामाभिषेचनम् consecration of Rama, न विहन्युः cannot obstruct, कृत्स्नाः all, त्रयः लोकाः च the three worlds, न cannot, पिता father, किं पुनः needless to say again.
2::23::21::राजन् O king, यैः by whom, अरण्ये in the forest, तव your, निवासः live, मिथः mutual, समर्थितः support, ते they, तथा in the same way, चतुर्दश समाः fourteen years, अरण्ये in the forest, निवत्स्यन्ति they shall reside.
2::23::22::तत् for that reason, अहम् I, पितुः father's, या Kaikeyi, तव your, अभिषेकविघातेन by obstructing your consecration, पुत्रराज्याय the kingdom for her son, वर्तते is intending, तस्याश्च her, आशाम् desire, छेत्स्यामि I will break asunder.
2::23::23::मद्बलेन with my valour, विरुद्धाय any one who opposes, उग्रम् terrible, मम पौरुषम् my valour, यथा how, दुःखाय for sorrow, प्रभविष्यति will result, तथा like that, दैव बलम् the power  of destiny, न स्यात् may not be.
2::23::24::प्रजापाल्यमनन्तरं afte ruling the subjects, वर्ष सहस्रान्ते after a thousand years, त्वयि you, वनवासं गते after you have withdrawn to the forest, आर्यपुत्राः your sons, करिष्यन्ति will rule them.
2::23::25::पुत्रेषु in sons, प्रजाः subjects, पुत्रवत् like sons, परिपालने in ruling, निक्षिप्य after entrusting, वनवासः retiring into the forest, पूर्वं राजर्षिवृत्त्या as rajarsis did in ancient times, विधीयते हि is established.
2::23::26::धर्मात्मन् O righteous one, राम Rama, राजनि when the king, अनेकाग्रे in many directions (and unable to decide), राज्यविभ्रमशङ्कया with apprehension that disturbances  in the kingdom will arise, सः त्वम् such you, एवम् in this way, राज्यम् kingdom, आत्मनि to you, न इच्छसि चेत् if it is not desired, ते to you, प्रतिजाने च I am swearing, वीर O valient one, वीरलोकभाक् attaining the afterworld of heroes, माऽभूवम् let it not be my fate, अहम् I, वेला shore, सागरम् इव like ocean, तव your, राज्यम् kingdom, रक्षेयम् I will protect.
2::23::27::त्वम् you, मङ्गलैः with auspicious materials, अभिषिञ्चस्व you may continue the consecration ceremony, तत्र in this matter, व्यापृतः getting engaged in, भव become, अहम् I, एकः singlehanded, बलात् by my valour, महीपालान् the kings, वारयितुम् to prevent, अलम् am competent.
2::23::28::इमौ this, मे बाहू my two arms, शोभार्थौ for purposes of enhancing beauty, न not, धनुः bow, भूषणाय for decorating, न not, असिः sword, आबन्धनार्थाय for fastening on my waist, न not, शराः arrows, स्तम्भहेतवः remain fixed, न not, मे my, सर्वम् all this, एतत् this, चतुष्टयम् four weapons, अमित्रदमनार्थम् only for subduing enemies.
2::23::29::अहम् I, यः who, मम my, शत्रुः as enemy, मतः स्यात् is considered, अत्यर्थम् exceedingly, न कामये I do not desire (to endure), तीक्ष्णधारेण with a sharpedged, विद्युच्चलितवर्चसा with the  lustre of flashing lightning, प्रगृहीतेन by holding, असिना with sword, शत्रुम् to the enemy, वज्रिणं वा or Indra, (bearer of thunder), न कल्पये will not spare.
2::23::30::मे my, खड्गनिष्पेषनिष्पिष्टैः by those hacked off with the sword, हस्त्यश्वनरहस्तोरुशिरोभिः with trunks of elephants, horses, hands, thighs and heads of warriors, मही the earth, गहना impenetrable, दुश्चरा impassable, भविता shall become.
2::23::31::अद्य now, (हया: horses), मे my, खङ्गधाराहताः struck by the blows of my sword, दीप्यमानाः burning, अद्रय इव like mountains, सविद्युतः with lightning, मेघा इव like clouds, भूमौ on the earth, पतिष्यन्ति will fall down.
2::23::32::मयि when I, बद्धगोधाङ्गुलित्राणे while donning the godha (a leather fence fastened round the left arm to prevent injury from the bowstring) and fingerprotector (a contrivance like a thimble used by archers to protect the thumb or finger from being injured by bowstring), प्रगृहीतशरासने while holding the bow, स्थिते while I stand, पुरुषाणाम् among men, पुरुषमानी one who considers himself manly, कथम् how, स्यात् will it be.
2::23::33::अहम् I, बहुभिः with many (arrows), एकम् only one, अत्यस्यन् striking and throwing, एकेन with one arrow, बहून् जनान् (striking) many men, बाणान् arrows, नृवाजिगजमर्मसु at the vitals of men, horses and elephants, विनियोक्ष्यामि I will aim at. 
2::23::34::प्रभो O Lord, अद्य today, मे my, अस्त्रप्रभावस्य of glorious weapons, प्रभावः strength, राज्ञः of the king (Dasaratha), अप्रभुताम् having no power over the kingdom, तव your, प्रभुत्वं च  supremacy over the kingdom, कर्तुम् to make, प्रभविष्यति is competent.
2::23::35::राम O Rama , अद्य today, चन्दन सारस्य of sandalwood cream, केयूरामोक्षणस्य of wearing armlets, वसूनाम् of wealth, विमोक्षस्य for distributing, सुहृदाम् friends, पालनस्य for protection, अनुरूपौ worthy, इमौ these (hands), ते your, अभिषेचनविघ्नस्य obstruction to your consecration, कर्तृ़णाम् those who are causing, निवारणे in preventing, कर्म act, करिष्यतः will take up.
2::23::36::तव your, असुहृत् enemy, कः who, अद्यैव now itself, मया by me, प्राणयशस्सुहृज्जनैः with life, fame and friends, वियुज्यताम् shall be separated, ब्रवीहि you may tell me, इयम् this, वसुधा earth, यथा how, तव your, वशे under control, भवेत् shall come under, तथैव in the way, माम् me, शाधि you may command, तव your, किङ्करः servant, अस्मि I am.
2::23::37::सः that, राघववंशवर्धनः source of prosperity for the Raghu dynastry, Rama, बाष्पम् tears, विमृज्य wiping, असकृत् again and again, परिसान्त्व्य च consoling, लक्ष्मणम् addressing Lakshmana, उवाच said, सौम्य O gentle one (Lakshmana), माम् me, पित्र्ये to father, वचने words, व्यवस्थितम् abiding, निबोध you may know, एषः that, सत्पथः हि is the right path.
