2::76::1::एवम् in this way, शोकसन्तप्तम् tormented with grief, कैकयीसुतम् son of Kaikeyi, तं भरतम् to that Bharata, वदताम् among the eloquent, श्रेष्ठः best, श्रेष्ठवाक् a man of excellent speech, वसिष्ठः ऋषिः sage Vasistha, उवाच said.
2::76::2::महायशः of great renown, राजपुत्रः king's son, ते भद्रं bless you, शोकेन by grief, अलम् enough, नरपतेः king's, प्राप्तकालम् time has come, उत्तमम् best, संयानम् funeral rites, कुरु perform.
2::76::3::धर्मवित् knower of his duty, भरतः Bharata, वसिष्ठस्य Vasistha's, वचः words, श्रूत्वा on hearing, धारणाम् steadiness, गतः regained, सर्वाणि all, प्रेतकार्यणि funeral rites, कारयामास began the performance.
2::76::4::सः पुत्रः that son Bharata, तैलसंरोधात् from the oil container, उद्धृतम् raised, भूमौ on the   floor, निवेशितम् placed, आपीतवर्णवदनम् with a pale yellowcoloured face, प्रसुप्तमिव as if sleeping, भूमिपम् protector of the earth, दशरथम् Dasaratha, नानारत्न परिष्कृते adorned with every kind of gem, अग्य्रे on a magnificient, शयने on the couch, संवेश्य ततः having placed then, सुदुःखितः  in extreme distress, विललाप lamented. 
2::76::5::राजन् O king, प्रोषिते when I was away from home, मयि अनागते before I could return, धर्मज्ञम्   righteous one, रामम् Rama, महाबलम् valiant, लक्ष्मणं च Lakshmana, विवास्य banished, ते  you, किम् what, व्यवसितम् was resolved?
2::76::6::महाराज O great king, अक्लिष्टकर्मणा by a man of pious acts, पुरुषसिंहेन by a lion among men, रामेण by Rama, हीनम् left, दुःखितम् bewailing, इमं जनम् this person, हित्वा leaving, क्व where, यास्यसि will you go?
2::76::7::राजन् O king, तात O father, त्वयि when you, स्वः to heaven, प्रयाते having gone, रामे च  Rama, वनम् forest, आश्रिते having taken refuge, अस्मिन् this, पुरे in your city, योगक्षेमम्  welfare and security, कल्पयिता who will arrange.
2::76::8::राजन् O king, त्वया by you, हीना bereft of, पृथिवी the earth, विधवा is a widow, न राजते does not shine, नगरी city, हीनचन्द्रा without Moon, रजनीव like the night, मा to me, प्रतिभाति  appears.
2::76::9::एवम् in this way, विलपमानम् lamenting, दीनमानसम् dejected mind, तं भरतम् to that Bharata, महामुनिः great ascetic, वसिष्ठः Vasistha, भूयः again, वचनम् words, अब्रवीत् said. 
2::76::10::महाबाहो O mightyarmed one, अस्य विशांपतेः for this king, यानि those, प्रेतकार्याणि funeral rites, कर्तव्यानि are required to be done, तानि them, अविचारितम् without hesitation, अव्यग्रम् attentively, क्रियान्ताम् may be performed. 
2::76::11::भरतः Bharata, तथेति 'Be it so', वरिष्ठस्य Vasistha's, तत् वाक्यम् those words, अभिपूज्य  honouring, सर्वशः every way, ऋत्विक्पुरोहिताचार्यान् learned Vedic scholars, family priests and spiritual preceptors, त्वरयामास hastened them up. 
2::76::12::नरेन्द्रस्य king's, ये अग्नयः the fire, अग्न्यगारात् from firesanctuary, बहिष्कृताः have been put outside, ते they, यथाविधि in accordance with the ritual precepts, ऋत्विग्भि: by Vedic priests, याजकैश्चैव by sacrificial attendants, आह्रियन्त were withdrawn.
2::76::13::अथ thereafter, परिचारकाः the attendants, गतचेतसम् deceased, राजानम् king, शिबिकायाम् on a litter, आरोप्य placing, बाष्पकण्ठाः with their throats choked with tears, विमनसः with dejected mind, तम् him, ऊहुः carried him away. 
2::76::14::जनाः people, नृपतेः king's, अग्रतः ahead, हिरण्यम् gold, सुवर्णं च with bright colour, विविधानि differents kinds, वासांसि च garments, प्रकिरन्तः strewing, मार्गम् on the way, ययुः went.
2::76::15::तथा like that, अपरे others, चन्दनागरूनिर्यासान् sandal, agaru and fragrant gum gugul, the resin of Balsa tree, सरलम् sarala tree, पद्मकम् padmaka tree, देवदारूणि च devadaru tree, अन्यान् other, उच्चावचान् of many kinds, गन्धान् fragrant substances, आहृत्य having brought, तत्र there, गत्वा having gone, क्षेपयन्ति were strewn, अथ there, ऋत्विजः priests, भूमिपम् the body of the king, तत्र there, चितामध्ये in the centre of fire, संवेशयामासुः laid it down.
2::76::16::तदा then, तदृत्विजः his priests, तस्य that king's, हुताशनम् fire, हुत्वा offering oblations, जेपुः intoned prayers, तत्र there, ते those, सामगाः those who chant Sama Veda, यथाशास्त्रम् in accordance with sacred scriptures, सामानि hymns, जगुश्च sang. 
2::76::17::तदा then, तस्य his (the king's), योषितः wives, वृद्धैः with aged guards, परिवृताः surrounded by, यथार्हम्  according to their rank, शिबिकाभिश्च in palanquins, यानैश्च in other carriages, नगरात् from the city, तत्र to that place, निर्ययुः departed.
2::76::18::तदा then, ऋत्विजः priests, शाकेसन्तप्ताः consumed with grief, कौशल्याप्रमुखाः led by Kausalya, स्त्रियश्च women also, अग्निचितम् engulfed by flames, तं नृपम् that king, प्रसव्यं चापि चक्रुः circumambulated in the reverse direction.
2::76::19::तत्र काले at that time, आर्तानाम् of the distressed persons, करुणम् piteously, क्रोशन्तीनाम् of those women crying, सहस्रशः in thousands, नारीणाम् women's, निनादः sound, क्रौञ्चीनामिव like the sound of the kraunchas (birds), शुश्रुवे was heard.
2::76::20::ततः then, रुदन्त्यो weeping, विवशाः uncontrolled, वराङ्गनाः courtesans, पुनः पुनः again and again, विलप्य lamenting, सरयूतीरम् on the bank of the river Sarayu, यानेभ्यः from the carriages, अवतेरुः alighted.
2::76::21::नृपाङ्गनाः wives of the king, ते they, मन्त्रिपुरोहिताश्च counsellors and priests, भरतेन सार्धम् along with Bharata, उदकम् waterlibations, कृत्वा having offered, अश्रुपरीतनेत्राः with their eyes filled with tears, पुरम् the city, प्रविश्य having reentered, दशाहम् ten days, भूमौ on the floor, दु:खम् their mourning period, व्यनयन्त spent. 
