2::30::1::Having heard her husband, the glorious and broadminded Sita was delighted with her desires fulfiled. She made preparations to gift away her wealth including jewels to the virtuous.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtieth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic  composed by sage Valmiki.
2::30::2::In response to Rama's consolation with regard to her stay in the forest, the daughter of Janaka, Maithili (Sita) said: 
2::30::3::Sita agitated over a supreme cause upbraided the broadchested scion of the Raghu race out of love and injured selfrespect.
2::30::4:: O Rama while accepting you as soninlaw did my father, king of Mithila and lord of Videha ever think that you are a woman in the guise of a man? 
2::30::5::Alas that will be a falschood if people out of ignorance say that there is no supreme splendour in Rama like the shining Sun. 
2::30::6:: What may be the cause for your fear and depression behind your desire to desert one who is so exclusively devoted to you?
2::30::7::Know, O valiant one, that by remaining subordinate to you, I am as faithful to you as Savitri was to her husband, Satyavanta, son of Dyumatsena.
2::30::8::O sinless son of the Raghus I am not like other women who bring disgreace to the family. I have not looked at any one except you, even with my mind's eye. I will go (to the forest) along with you.
2::30::9::I have been living with you for a long time, O Rama I am young and chaste. Why do you, like an actor, wish to hand me over to others. 
2::30::10::You, O sinless Rama, may become subservient and obedient to them about whose wellfare you are speaking of and on account of whom you are preventing me to go (along with you).
2::30::11::You should not depart for the forest without taking me. Be it for penance or for the forest or for heaven, I wish to be with you.
2::30::12:: While following you, I will feel no fatigue there on the way as if I am going on a pleasurestroll or in a comfortable couch. 
2::30::13:: The white reeds, the kusha, the sara and the ishika grasses and thorny trees on the way will feel as soft as cotton or as the skin of a black antelope.
2::30::14::I shall regard, O charming Rama, the harmful dust raised by the stormy wind and settled on me as the most excellent sandal powder. 
2::30::15::O rover of the forest I will feel happier when I sleep on the meadows (of tender green grass) on the outskirts of the forest than when I sleep on the couch spread with carpets.
2::30::16::Whatever leaves or roots or fruits you collect with your own hands for me little or much, they will be nectar to me.
2::30::17::Enjoying the seasonal flowers and fruits in the forest, I will not remember my mother or father or home.
2::30::18::Therefore, you should not anticipate any problem from me in the forest. Neither shall I be burdensome to you nor shall I make you experience any sorrow on my account.
2::30::19:: Wherever I be with you is heaven and without, hell. O Rama, recognise this truth, and derive great pleasure in my company.
2::30::20:: If you do not take me to the forest without the least hesitation I shall consume poison right now, but not live under the control of enemies (at Ayodhya).
2::30::21:: If forsaken, O Lord I shall not live a life of sorrow. Instant death is better (than abandoned existence).
2::30::22::I cannot bear this grief even for a moment, what to speak of fourteen (ten and three and one) years of grieving. 
2::30::23::Tormented with grief, Sita piteously and profusely lamented, and then exhausted,  embraced her husband  tightly and cried bitterly.
2::30::24::Pierced by so many words (of objection from  Rama), Sita felt like a cowelephant penetrated by poisonsmeared arrrows. And shed her longsuppressed tears like arani (a firekindling stick) kindling fire.
2::30::25:: Crystallike tears arising out of distress flowed from her eyes like water trickling from two lotuses.
2::30::26::Her face with large eyes assumed the brightness of an immaculate Moon and withered with tears like a lotus plucked out of water. 
2::30::27::With his arms Rama embraced Sita who had almost fainted in grief. And in order to create confidence in her he said these words: 
2::30::28::When you are in grief O Devi I do not desire even heaven. Like the selfcreated Brahma, I have no fear for any one.
2::30::29::O Sita of auspicious countenance even though I am capable of protecting you I did not like your stay in the forest as I did not know your intentions.
2::30::30::Since you, O daughter of Mithila, were born to go along with me to the forest, I cannot abandon you just as a selfrespecting man cannot forsake his reputation.
2::30::31::O one  with (shapely) thighs like the trunk of an elephant follow only the path of righteousness practised earlier by the virtuous as Suvarchala follows the Sun.
2::30::32:: Not that I shall not go to the forest (go I must). My father's word nourished by truth is leading me there, O daughter of Janaka 
2::30::33:: Obedience to parents is a righteous act. Therefore, O one with fair hips I cannot live and disobey the word of truth. 
2::30::34::Mother, father and preceptor are present before us. By overstepping them, how can we, in various ways, worship God who is beyond reach (not visible)?
2::30::35::Where these three(mother,father and preceptor) equal to the three worlds are, O one with loverly sideglances, there is none in this world as holy. Therefore, they are to be worshipped.
2::30::36:: Truth or munificence or homage or distribution of gifts to the revered ones or sacrifices, O Sita, are  not considered as efficacious as service to father.
2::30::37::By fulfilling father's wish, nothing is difficult to achieve, whether it is heaven, or wealth, or foodgrains, or learning, or sons or other comforts.
2::30::38::Great men who are devoted to the service of their parents attain the world of the gods, of gandharvas, of cows, of Visnu, of Brahma and other worlds.
2::30::39::My father who follows the path of truth and dharma whatever be his commands, I wish to obey. He is, indeed, dharma eternal.
2::30::40:: O Sita, my discretion fails me in deciding whether to take you to Dandaka forest or not. You are, however, firmly determined to follow me, saying, you can live in the forest.
2::30::41:: O one with fascinating eyes and exquisite beauty you were born to live in the forest. O gentle lady, assist me in carrying out my duties.
2::30::42:: You, O my lovely beloved Sita, have taken in the right time a highly dignified decision befitting in all ways your family, myself and yourself.
2::30::43:: O Sita, begin right now all preparations necessary for residing in the forest. O one, with beautiful buttocks, without you even the very heaven does not please me.
2::30::44::Give away your jewels to brahmins who need them and food to religious mendicants. Hurry up Do not delay.
2::30::45::Distribute among your attendants highly valuable ornaments and excellent clothing, charming articles meant for (court) sport, my couches, chariots and all other things. Offer the rest to brahmins.
2::30::46:: Having come to know that her departure to the forest is acceptable to her husband, Sita, highly delighted, quickly got ready to give away (things).
