2::30::1::
2::30::2::वनवासनिमित्ताय for stay in forest, रामेण by Rama, सान्त्व्यमाना consoled, जनकात्मजा Janaka's daughter, मैथिली Maithili, भर्तारम्   to husband, इदम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::30::3::उत्तमसंविग्ना agitated for  a supreme cause, सा सीता that Sita, विपुल वक्षसम् man of broadchested, राघवम् scion of the Raghu dynasty, प्रणयात् out of love, अभिमानाच्च injured selfrespect, परिचिक्षेप blamed.
2::30::4::राम O Rama, पुरुषविग्रहम् in the form of a man, स्त्रियम् a woman, त्वा you, जामातरम् as  soninlaw, प्राप्य having obtained, मिथिलाधिपः king of Mithila, वैदेहः lord of Videha, मे पिता my father, किम् what, अमन्यत thought of.
2::30::5::तपति in a blazing, दिवाकरे इव like in the Sun, रामे in Rama, परम् great, तेजः splendour, नास्ति is not  to be found, अयं लोकः this world, अज्ञानात् out of ignorance, वक्ष्यति यदि if they say so, then that one, अनृतम् is a falsehood, बत alas
2::30::6::त्वम् you, अनन्यपरायणाम् with none else as her refuge, माम् me, परित्यक्तुकामः (इति) यत् that you want to desert, त्वम् you, किं हि कृत्वा for what reason, विषण्णः depressed,  ते to you, कुतः वा from where, भयम् fear, अस्ति exists.
2::30::7::वीर O valiant one, माम् me, द्युमत्सेन सुतम् son of Dyumatsena, सत्यवन्तम् Satyavanta, अनुव्रताम् faithfully following, सावित्रीमिव like Savitri, आत्मवशवर्तिनीम् remaining under your subordination, विद्धि know.
2::30::8::अनघ O sinless one, राघव Rama, कुलपांसनी a woman who bring disgrace to the family, अन्या यथा like any other ordinary woman, अहम् I, त्वदृते except you, अन्यम् other one, मनसापि even in mind, न द्रष्टास्मि not see, त्वया with you, गच्चेयम् I shall go to the forest.
2::30::9::राम O Rama कौमारीम् young, चिरम् for a long time, अध्युषिताम् living with you, सतीम् chaste, भार्याम् wife, माम् me, शैलूषः इव like an actor, स्वयम् on your own accord, परेभ्यः to others, दातुम् to give, इच्छसि wish.
2::30::10::अनघ O sinless, राम O Rama यस्य whose, पथ्यम् welfare, आत्थ are speaking, यस्य च अर्थे on account of whom, अवरुध्यसे you are preventing me, त्वम् you, तस्य for him, सदा always, वश्यः च subservient, विधेयः च also obedient, भव shall be.
2::30::11::सः त्वम् such as you, माम् me, अनादाय without taking me, वनम् to the forest, प्रस्थातुम् to set forth, नार्हसि it does not behove you, तपो वा either for penance, यदि वा or, अरण्यम् to forest, स्वर्गो वा or to heaven, मे me, त्वया सह स्यात् to be with you.
2::30::12::तव your, पृष्ठतः behind, गच्छन्त्याः going, मे to me, तत्र there, पथि on the way, विहारशयनेष्विव on a pleasure stroll or in a (luxurious) couch, कश्चित् even a little, परिश्रमः strain, न भविता will not be.
2::30::13::त्वया सह along with you, मार्गे on the way, कुशकाशशरेषीकाः Kusha, white reeds, Sara and  Ishika grasses, कण्टकिनः thorny, ये द्रुमाः च other trees, तूलाजिन समस्पर्शाः shall feel like the touch of cotton and the skin of a black antelope.
2::30::14::रमण O Charming one महावातसमुद्धूतम् raised by the stormy wind, यत् which, रजः dust, माम् me, अपकरिष्यति will harm, तत् that one, परार्थ्यम् most excellent, चन्दनम् इव like sandal powder, मन्ये shall consider. 
2::30::15::वनगोचर Rover of the forest, वनान्ते on the outskirts of the forest,  शाद्वलेषु on the meadows (of tender green grass), यथा as, शिश्ये I will lie down, ततः more than that, कुथास्तरणतल्पेषु in the couch spread with carpets, सुखतरम् more comfortable, स्यात्किम् what shall be?
2::30::16::त्वम् you, यत् whichever, पत्रम् leaf, मूलम् root, फलम् fruit, अल्पं वा even a little, यदि वा or,  बहु much, स्वयम् on your own, आहृत्य having collected, दास्यसि you will give me, तत् that one, मे to me, अमृतरसोपमम् like nectar, (भवेत् shall become).
2::30::17::तत्र there, आर्तवानि seasonal, पुष्पाणि flowers, फलानि च also fruits, उपभुञ्जाना while enjoying, मातुः mother, न स्मरिष्यामि will not remember, पितुः न not about father, वेश्मनः  about home, न will not.
2::30::18::ततः for that reason, तत्र there, किञ्चित् even a little, विप्रियम् unpleasant, द्रष्टुम् to see, नार्हसि does not behove you, मत्कृते on my account, ते to you, शोकः sorrow, न will not come, दुर्भरा burden, न भविष्यामि I will not be.
2::30::19::त्वया सह in your company, यः that  which is obtained, सः that alone, स्वर्गः is heaven, त्वया विना without you, निरयः is hell, इति thus, जानन् while being aware, राम Rama, मया सह along with me, पराम् great, प्रीतिम् pleasure, गच्छ obtain.
2::30::20::अथ otherwise, एवम् in this way, अव्यग्राम् with unhesitant disposition, माम् me, वनम् to the forest, नैव नयिष्यति यदि if you do not at all take, अद्यैव rightaway, विषम् poison, पास्यामि will drink, द्विषताम् enemies', वशम् in the company of, मा गमम् not go.
2::30::21::नाथ O Lord, त्वया by you, उज्झितायाः of an abandoned lady, मम to me, पश्चादपि even afterwards, दुःखेन through grief, जीवितम् life, नैवास्ति will not be there, तदैव than abandonment, मरणम् death, वरम् is better.
2::30::22::इमम् this, शोकम् grief, मुहूर्तमपि even for a moment, सहितुम् to endure, नोत्सहे will not agree, दश ten, त्रीणि three, एकं च one, वर्षाणि years, दुःखिता a grieving woman, किं पुनः what to say again?
2::30::23::सा that Sita, शोकसन्तप्ता tormented with grief, आयस्ता exhausted, इति thus, करुणम्  piteously, बहु profusely, विलप्य lamenting, पतिम् husband, आलिङ्ग्य embracing, सस्वरम् with loud voice, भृशम् tightly, चुक्रोश cried.
2::30::24::दिग्धै: arrows smeared with poison, गजाङ्गना इव like a cowelephant, सा she, बहुभिः many, वाक्यैः with words, विद्धा was pierled, चिरसन्नियतम् longsuppressed, बाष्पम् tears, आरणिः अग्निमिव like fire produced by arani (a firekindling stick), मुमोच released.
2::30::25::तस्याः her, नेत्राभ्याम् from the eyes, सन्तापसम्भवम् arising out of distress, स्फटिक सङ्काशम्  like crystal, वारि water, पङ्कजाभ्याम् from two lotuses, उदकमिव like water, परिसुस्राव flowed. 
2::30::26::अमलचन्द्राभम् possessing the brightness of the stainless Moon, आयतलोचनम् having large eyes, तत् that, मुखंचैव from the face, जलोद्धृतम् plucked from water, अम्बुजमिव like a lotus, बाष्पेण with tears, पर्यशुष्यत withered.
2::30::27::तदा then, रामः Rama, दुःखिताम् in grief, विसंज्ञामिव as if fainted, ताम् her, बाहुभ्याम् with arms,  परिष्वज्य having embraced, परिविश्वासयन् creating her confidence, वचनम् words, उवाच said.
2::30::28::देवि O Devi, तव your, दुःखेन with grief, स्वर्गमपि even heaven, न अभिरोचये I do not desire, मे to me, स्वयम्भोरिव like selfcreated Brahma, सर्वतः from everything, किञ्चित् even a little, भयम् fear, नास्ति हि is not there.
2::30::29::शुभानने O one possessing auspicious countenance, रक्षणे in protecting you, शक्तिमानपि even though powerful, तव your, सर्वम् fully, अभिप्रायम् intention, अविज्ञाय without  knowing, अरण्ये in the forest, वासम् your residing, न रोचये do not like.
2::30::30::मैथिलि O daughter of Mithila (Sita), यत् since, मयासार्धम् along with me, वनवासाय for living in the forest, सृष्टासि created, आत्मवता by selfrespecting, कीर्तिर्यथा like reputation, मया by me, विहातुम् to abandon, न शक्या is not possible.
2::30::31::गजनासोरु O Lady with thighs like the trunk of an elephant, धर्मः righteousness, पुरा formerly, सद्भिः by virtuous men, आचरितः is practised, सुवर्चला wife of Sun (Suvarchala), सूर्यं यथा like Sun, तम् that righteousness, अहम् I, अद्य now, अनुवर्ते shall follow.
2::30::32::जनकनन्दिनि O daughter of Janaka, अहम् I, वनम् to the forest, न खलु न गच्छेयम् it is not that I shall not go, पितुः father's, सत्योपबृंहितम् nourished by truth, तत् वचनं that word, माम् me, नयति is leading.
2::30::33::सुश्रोणि O one with beautiful posteriors, पितुः of father, मातुश्च of mother, वश्यता in obedience, एषः this one, धर्मस्तु is a righteous act, अतश्च for that reason, तम् that (word of truth), व्यतिक्रम्य disobeying, अहम् I, जीवितुम् to live, न उत्सहे do not wish.
2::30::34::स्वाधीनम् within our reach, मातरम् mother, पितरम् father, गुरुम् preceptor, समतिक्रम्य over stepping, अस्वाधीनम् beyond reach, दैवम् God, प्रकारैः in various ways, कथम् how, अभिराध्यते is worshipped?
2::30::35::शुभापाङ्गे O one having lovely side glances, यत्र which, त्रयम् all the three (father, mother and preceptor), तत्र that, त्रयः three, लोकाः worlds, तत्समम् equal to those three, पवित्रम् अन्यत् any other holy thing, लोके in the world, नास्ति none, तेन therefore, इदम् this, अभिराध्यते is worshipped.
2::30::36::सीते O Sita, पितुः of father, सेवा service, यथा as, हिता salutary, तथा so,  सत्यम् truth, न not, दानमानौ charity, honour, न not, आप्तदक्षिणाः gifts for the revered ones, यज्ञाःच sacrifices, बलकराः न not strengthening.
2::30::37::गुरुवृत्त्यनुरोधेन fulfilling father's desire, स्वर्गः is heaven, धनं वा or wealth, धान्यं वा or  foodgrains, विद्याः learning, पुत्राः sons, सुखानि च comforts, किञ्चिदपि anything, दुर्लभम् difficult to obtain, न not.
2::30::38::मातापितृपरायणाः people devoted to the service of parents, महात्मानः great men, देवगन्धर्वगोलोकान् the world of the gods, gandharvas, and the cows or Visnu, ब्रह्मलोकम्  the world of Brahma, तथा and, अपरान् other worlds, प्राप्नुवन्ति will attain.
2::30::39::सत्यधर्मपथे On the path of truth and dharma, स्थितः firmly fixed, सः पिता such father, माम्   me, यथा as, शास्ति commands, तथा accordingly, वर्तितुम् to abide by, इच्छामि wish सः that one, सनातनः eternal, धर्मः हि is truth indeed.
2::30::40::सीते O Sita, त्वाम् you, दण्डकावनम् to Dandaka forest, नेतुम् to take you, मम my, मतिः mind, सन्ना is determined, सा त्वम् such you, वसिष्यामि I can live in the forest, इति like that, माम् me, अनुयातुम् to follow, सुनिश्चिता firmly determined.
2::30::41::मदिरेक्षणे O one with fascinating eyes, अनवद्याङ्गि exquisitely beautiful, सा you, वनाय to the forest, सृष्टा you have been created, भीरु O gentle lady, माम् me, अनुगच्छस्व follow me, सहधर्मचरी carrying out together duties, भव become,
2::30::42::कान्ते O my lovely beloved, सीते Sita, त्वम् you, मम for me, स्वस्य your own, कुलस्य च of the family, सर्वथा in all ways, सदृशम् befitting, अतिशोभनम् highly dignified, व्यवसायम् resolution,  अनुक्रान्ता done in due order.
2::30::43::शुभश्रोणि O One with beautiful buttocks Sita, वनवासक्षमाः suitable for residing in the forest, क्रियाः those acts, इदानीम् now, आरभस्व commence, सीते O Sita, त्वदृते without you, मम to me, स्वर्गोपि even heaven, न रोचते does not please.
2::30::44::आशंसमानेभ्यः for the needy, ब्राह्मणेभ्यः to brahmins, रत्नानि च jewels, भिक्षुकेभ्यः to mendicants, भोजनं च food also, देहि you may bestow, सन्त्वरस्व च hasten, मा चिरम् do not delay.
2::30::45::महार्हाणि highly valuable, यानि all, भूषणानि ornaments, वरवस्त्राणि excellent clothing, रमणीयाः charming, ये केचित् whichever, क्रीडार्थाः meant for sport, उपस्कराः articles, मम my, शयनीयानि couches, यानानि chariots, अन्यानि other, यानि च all things, स्वभृत्यवर्गस्य to your attendants, देहि give, अनन्तरम् after that, ब्राह्मणानाम् to brahmins.
2::30::46::सा देवी Devi, आत्मनः her own, गमनम् departure, भर्तुः with her husband, अनुकूलम् is favourable, ज्ञात्वा having come to know, प्रमुदिता happy, क्षिप्रम् quickly, दातुमेव to gift away, उपचक्रमे began.
