2::41::1::When Rama, the foremost men, was departing with folded palms there arose a huge cry of distress from the inner apartment of ladies.
2::41::2::Rama was a refuge and a protector to all the people who were defenceless, weak and miserable. Where is such a protector going now? (said the people).
2::41::3::Where is he who, even if reviled, never gets angry, never does acts that provoke anger, pacifies those who are enraged and shares the sorrows of others going now?
2::41::4::Where is he, that effulgent, magnanimous one who treated us (with the same respect) as he treated his mother Kausalya, going now?
2::41::5::Tormented by Kaikeyi, the king ordered him to go to the forest. Where is he, who happened to be the protector of the people of this world, going now? 
2::41::6:: Alas, the king must be devoid of any sense as he is sending away Rama, who is dear to the world, is righteous and truthful, to dwell in the forest.
2::41::7:: So wept aloud the anguished wives of the king like cows separated from their calves.
2::41::8::Upon hearing the dreadful wailing from the inner apartments of the palace, the king already devasted at the separation from his son, grew even more distressed.
2::41::9::The sacred fire in agnihotra sacrifices was not invoked householders did not cook their food the people did not attend to their daily chores. And the Sun set.
2::41::10::Elephants dropped their morsel of food. Cows did not suckle their calves. Even the mothers were not pleased with their firstborn sons. 
2::41::11:: The constellation Trishanku, the planets Mars, Jupiter, Mercury and other fierce planets took their position near the Moon. 
2::41::12:: The stars were shorn of their radiance. The brilliance of the planets diminished. Shrouded in smoke the Visakha constellation appeared in the sky.
2::41::13::After Rama left for the forest, dark clouds appeared (in the sky) like the (waves of) the great ocean uplifted by the speed of the wind which shook the city. 
2::41::14::As if covered with darkness, all the cardinal points became agitated. No planet, no star nor was anything (any heavenly body) shining (in the sky). 
2::41::15:: All of a sudden the people of the city became miserable. No one was interested in eating and enjoying (life). 
2::41::16::All the citizens of Ayodhya, afflicted with a series of grief and heaving deep sighs  ceaselessly bewailed at the sight of the lord of the world (Dasaratha).
2::41::17:: The faces of the people on the highway were turbid with tears. None looked happy. All were plunged in sorrow.
2::41::18:: The breeze did not blow cool. No more did the Moon look pleasant. The Sun did not give warmth to the world. All the world was agitated. 
2::41::19:: Mothers stopped thinking of their sons and husbands of their wives. Brothers were no longer interested in each other. Every one deserted every one and thought only of Rama.
2::41::20::All the friends of Rama were stupefied. Afflicted with the burden of sorrow they did not leave their bed.
2::41::21::Without magnanimous Rama, Ayodhya thereafter looked like the earth along with its mountains bereft of Indra. Afflicted with fear and sorrow it started shaking dreadfully with the sounds of horses, elephants and warriors. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyfirst sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
