2::25::1::Highminded mother Kausalya, her anguish subdued, performed the sipping rite (achamana) and her self rendered pure, performed auspicious ceremonies for Rama. 
2::25::2::I am unable to dissuade you, O the best among the descendants of Raghus, from going into the forest. Go now and return soon. Follow in the footsteps of the virtuous.
2::25::3:: The duty which you are carrying out with courage and selfdiscipline, O tiger among the descendants of Raghu will alone protect you.
2::25::4::O my son may the gods in the temples and in other sacred places and the maharshis you bow to protect you in the forest
2::25::5::May the weapons endowed with mantric qualities, which were bestowed on you by sagacious Viswamitra always protect you
2::25::6::O my mighty armed son protected by the service to your father, mother and to truth, live long
2::25::7::O best of men may sacrificial fuel, kusa grass and sacred rings made of kusha grass, sacrificial altars, temples, various levelled sacrificial grounds, mountains, trees, plants, lakes, birds, serpents and lions protect you
2::25::8::May all gods known as Sadhyas, Visvedevatas, Maruts, great ascetics, the sustainer (Virat Purusha), the preserver of creation (lord Brahma), Sun, Bhaga, Aryama, and all other important guardians of the world headed by Indra bestow their blessings on you
2::25::9::May the six seasons, years, months, fortnights, nights, days and moments bring good to you
2::25::10::O my son may Smriti, Dhriti and Dharma always guard you. May divine personages and gods, Skanda, Soma, Brihaspati, the seven rishis and Narada protect you at all times
2::25::11::May Siddhas, guardians of the quarters invoked by me protect you from all  directions in that forest at all times, O my son
2::25::12::When you dwell in the forest may all the mountains, seas, lord Varuna, heaven, space, and earth and also all rivers, all stars and planets with their presiding deities, day, night, dawn and dusk protect you
2::25::13::May all the six pious seasons, months, years, kala and kashta contribute to your wellbeing
2::25::14::May gods and demons always give you happiness when you wander in that great forest clad in ascetic garb
2::25::15:: Let there be no fear from rakshasas who are fearful to look at and commit cruel acts, from pisachas (evil spirits) and from flesheating animals, O my child
2::25::16::May monkeys, scorpions, wild gnats, mosquitoes, reptiles and insects in that inaccessible forest not trouble you
2::25::17::May the mighty elephants, lions with pointed incisors, tigers, bears and fierce, wild, horned buffaloes, do you no harm, O my dear son
2::25::18::May the ferocious breed of cernivores I worship not harm you, O my child
2::25::19::O Rama may your path be auspecious May your valour be fruitful Go safel and achieve success in everything
2::25::20::May gods from the sky, the earth and all other gods protect you and let there be no harm to you from your foes.
2::25::21::Propitiated by my worship, O Rama may Brihaspati, Moon, Sun, Kubera and Yama protect you when you are in Dandaka forest
2::25::22::May Fire, Wind, Smoke and Mantras emanated from the mouths of rishis protect you when you take your ablutions, O Son of the Raghu race O Joy of the Raghus
2::25::23::May Siva, lord of all the worlds, Visnu, supporter of living beings, Brahma, rishis and all the rest of the gods protect you while you dwell in the forest
2::25::24:: Thus illustrious, largeeyed Kausalya worshipped hosts of gods by offering them garlands and fragrant substances with appropriate prayers.  
2::25::25::After collecting the sacred fire through great brahmins she duly offered oblations to the gods for the welfare of Rama.  
2::25::26::Noble Kausalya procured clarified butter, garlands of white flowers, sacred fuel, and grains of white mustard seed (for oblations to the gods).
2::25::27::The officiating priest performed the ritual of sacrificial offerings strictly in accordance   with rules for peace and happiness of Rama. With the remainder of the offerings, he performed whatever ceremonies were to be done externally.
2::25::28:: Thereafter she made the brahmins pronounce benedictory prayers, offering honey, curd, rice and clarified butter.Then she got mantras (expiatory rites) recited for averting evil to Rama while in the forest.  
2::25::29::The illustrious Kausalya, mother of Rama gave abundant gifts to the best of the brahmins and thereafter said to him:
2::25::30::May the same blessings bestowed by all the gods on the thousandeyed Indra at the time of killing Vritra be with you
2::25::31::May you be conferred with the same blessings which Vinata bestowed on Garuda at the time of bringing nectar
2::25::32::May you be bestowed with the same blessings conferred by Aditi on Indra, the wielder of thunder for the killing of daityas at the time nectar was generated
2::25::33:: O Rama by occupying three footsteps of space, highly lustrous Visnu owned the three worlds and obtained glory. May you obtain similar auspiciousness
2::25::34::O mightyarmed Rama may the auspicious and prosperous seasons, seas, islands. the Vedas, the worlds and the quarters bless you
2::25::35::The largeeyed Kausalya placed the remains of the offerings on his (Rama's) head and  applied sandal cream to his body. She tied an auspicious medicinal herb known as Vishalyakarani to his arm for attainment of his objectives, repeatedly muttering prayers.
2::25::36::Even though Kausalya was filled with distress, she appeared as if she was very much happy. She uttered  mere words in a confusing tone without applying her mind.  
2::25::37:: Illustrious Kausalya embraced Rama, bending his head down and smelt his forehead. And then said O Rama go in peace and come back after accomplishing the objective.
2::25::38:: O my son I shall be happy to behold you back in Ayodhya in sound health  successful in your objectives and firmly established in the kingdom.
2::25::39::When you return from the forest like the full Moon rising, I shall behold you with my anxieties gone and my face sparkling with joy. 
2::25::40::After you have fulfilled your father's words and returned from your exile I shall behold you seated on the throne, O Rama
2::25::41::O Rama, credited with auspicious events on return from the forest, fulfil my desires and those of my daughterinlaw (Sita).
2::25::42:: O son of the Raghu race Lord Siva and other gods, the great rishis, bhutas, great asuras and serpents and four quarters worshipped by me will always promote your welfare when you dwell in the forest.
2::25::43::Thus with her eyes brimming with tears, she duly completed the benedictory rites and  circumambulated the scion of the Raghus and embraced him again and again holding him tight.
2::25::44::Circumambulated by mother Kausalya, the illustrious scion of the Raghu race clasped his mother's feet again and again. And shining in his glory, proceeded to the palace of Sita.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पञ्चविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyfifth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
