2::35::1::Overcome with anger, charioteer Sumantra started shaking his head and sighing off and on, crushing his palms and grinding his teeth. His eyes turned red due to anger. Overcome with a sudden, ominous grief, the complexion of his face turned red.  Sumantra understood the mind of Dasaratha. With sharp arrows of words as if piercing the heart of Kaikeyi, he denounced her in exceptionally harsh words which, like thunderbolt, cut her to the quick:
2::35::2::Overcome with anger, charioteer Sumantra started shaking his head and sighing off and on, crushing his palms and grinding his teeth. His eyes turned red due to anger. Overcome with a sudden, ominous grief, the complexion of his face turned red.  Sumantra understood the mind of Dasaratha. With sharp arrows of words as if piercing the heart of Kaikeyi, he denounced her in exceptionally harsh words which, like thunderbolt, cut her to the quick:
2::35::3:: O Kaikeyi  you have forsaken king Dasaratha, your husband and the lord of this entire world consisting of the movable and the immovable immovable and movable world. There is nothing in this world which you are notcapable of doing.  
2::35::4::King Dasaratha is invincible like Indra, unshakeable like a mountain and unperturbable like the ocean. By causing grief to him through your action I feel you are killing your husband (inch by inch). I think you are ultimately destroying your own race. 
2::35::5::Do not have contempt for Dasaratha who is your husband, nourisher and bestower of boons. For a wife, the desire of her husband is considered worthier than ten million sons. 
2::35::6::After the death of the king, the princes will obtain the kingdom according to   seniority. Why do you want to break this tradition in the case of Rama, the lord of the Ikshvaku dynasty? 
2::35::7::Let your son Bharata be king and rule the earth. All of us will go whereever Rama goes. 
2::35::8::Now by  your act, you intend to transgress the bounds of tradition(code of conduct). No brahmin shall ever dwell in your country. 
2::35::9::All of us certainly will follow the path pursued by Rama. Abandoned by relatives, brahmins and virtuous men for all times, what pleasure will you derive by your lust for this kingdom? O Kaikeyi, why do you intend to trangress the limits of honour?  
2::35::10:: It is a wonder that the earth does not split right away when you are perpetrating such an (abominable) act.
2::35::11::It is a wonder that while bent upon banishing Rama, you are  not destroyed by frightening fire created by great brahmarsis, crying, 'Shame, shame' 
2::35::12:: By axing a mango tree and growing a nimba in its place and sprinkling it with milk one does not get sweet fruit.
2::35::13:: Your nature corresponds to your mother's, so I think. 'Honey will not flow from a nimba tree' is a wellknown saying in this world. 
2::35::14:: We have heard in the past about the evil (stubborn) nature of your mother. Once a bestower of boons conferred an extraordinary boon on your father by virtue of which he could tell the sounds of all living beings. He also understood the language of all crookedly  moving creatures. 
2::35::15::Then one day near his bed your highly brilliant father laughed repeatedly over what an ant or a bird said, for he knew the meaning from its sound.
2::35::16::This incensed your mother who seeking the noose of death, asked him, 'O handsome king, I intend to know the cause of your laughter'. 
2::35::17::'O queen if I disclose it, then I will undoubtedly die that very movement' replied the king to his wife.
2::35::18::Then your mother said to your father, 'Whether you live or die, tell me the cause. You are laughing at me'.
2::35::19::Hearing the words of his beloved, king of Kekaya related the entire matter, as it happened, concerning the conferor of boons. 
2::35::20::That holy man who had granted the boon (to the king) had said, 'Let her die or destroy herself, but do not disclose (the cause of your laughter).  
2::35::21:: Happy to hear these words, your father sent away your mother and moved about like Kubera. 
2::35::22::O evilminded one you, too, are following the path of wickedness, forcing the king infatuated (with you) to act unrighteously. 
2::35::23::The generally accepted saying in this world that 'sons resemble the father and, daughters the mother' appears true to me today.
2::35::24::Do not be like your mother. Accept what the king says. Abide by his wishes. Be his saviour. 
2::35::25::Instigated by the wicked, do not attribute unrighteousness to your husband who is equal to Indra in brilliance and is the sustainer of this world. 
2::35::26::The lotuseyed, sinless and prosperous king Dasaratha, O Devi will not render false the promise given you (he will fulfil it in another form). 
2::35::27:: Let his eldest son Rama, valiant, generous, skilful, dutiful and protector of this world, be consecrated.
2::35::28::O Devi, if Rama goes to the forest leaving his father, the king, you will be squarely blamed by the people of the world.
2::35::29::Therefore, let Rama potect this kingdom. Be relieved of mental afflictions. There is no other person in this excellent city more competent than Rama to rule this kingdom. 
2::35::30:: If Rama is installed as heirapparent, king Dasaratha, the great archer will retire to the forest for carrying out austerities following ancient customs.
2::35::31:: Sumantra tried with words both gentle and sharp to make Kaikeyi regret. And then stood with folded palms in the presence of the king.    
2::35::32:: (Despite the exhortations by Sumantra) Kaikeyi remained unperturbed. She did not feel sorry. There was no change in the expression of her face.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे पंचत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyfifth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.   
