2::9::1::Thus spoken to, Kaikeyi, her face burning with anger, breathed a deep, hot sigh and said these words to Manthara:
2::9::2::Today I shall at once banish Rama from here into the forest and get Bharata coronated as heirapparent without delay.
2::9::3::O Manthara now see, for sure, Bharata and not Rama will get the kingdom by any means.
2::9::4::Thus addressed by queen Kaikeyi, that evil minded Manthara said this to Kaikeyi  in order to spoil the interest of Rama:
2::9::5:: O Kaikeyi, what a joy I shall now tell you how your son Bharata alone will secure the kingdom. Listen to me:
2::9::6::O Kaikeyi, don't you remember in your own interest what I'm going to tell you or are you hiding it, wishing to hear from me? 
2::9::7::O lovely Kaikeyi if it pleases you to hear from me, I shall tell you. Listen and think over it, too. 
2::9::8::After hearing Manthara's words, Kaikeyi got up a little from her wellspread bed and said this: 
2::9::9:: O Manthara, tell me the means by which Bharata and not Rama will secure the kingdom in any circumstances.
2::9::10::Thus addressed by the queen (Kaikeyi), the evileyed hunchback, Manthara, said with the intention to damage Rama's interest.
2::9::11::O queen during the war between gods and asuras, your husband went with royal saints intending to render assistance to Indra, king of the gods, taking you along with him. He set off in the southern direction of Dandaka forest to a renowned city called Vaijayanta where asura Timidhvaja lived.
2::9::12:: That mighty asura wellknown as Sambara, capable of a hundred deceitful forms, challenged Indra to a battle which could not be conquered by hosts of gods. 
2::9::13::In that great battle, the rakshasas used to kill by force the warriors wounded by the weapons and those fast asleep during the night.
2::9::14::There in that great battle the mightyarmed king Dasaratha lay wounded with weapons (used) by the asuras.
2::9::15::O queen you had protected your husband by carrying him away from the battlefield when he lost his consciousness. He was saved by you. Once again you saved him when he lay wounded with weapons (hurled) by the asuras. 
2::9::16::O auspiciouslooking one out of gratitude he had granted two boons to you (for saving him on two occasions). O queen then you told your husband that whenever you desire, you will ask for those boons. The magnanimous king said, 'So be it'. 
2::9::17::O queen I did not know this indeed. Only you had related it to me earlier. Because of my affection towards you, I have retained it in my memory. (Now) prevent preparations for Rama's consecration by force.
2::9::18::Ask your husband for those two boons namely consecration of Bharata and banishment  of Rama for fourteen years.
2::9::19::If Rama is banished into the forest for fourteen years your son will be firmly established in the kingdom by  affectionately winning the hearts of  the people.
2::9::20::O Kaikeyi ,daughter of Ashwapati enter now the chamber of wrath like one in angry mood, wearing soiled garments and lie down on the bare ground.
2::9::21::Immersed in grief and in tears, neither look at him (Dasaratha) nor even talk to him when you see him.
2::9::22::No doubt, you have always been a beloved wife to your husband. For your sake the great king will even enter into the burning fire.
2::9::23::The king is afraid of inciting your ire. When you are angry, he dare not look at your indignant countenance. Indeed he will forsake even his life for your pleasure. 
2::9::24::The king would not dare transgress your words. O wicked woman, recognise the power of your beauty.
2::9::25::King Dasaratha may give you gems, pearls, gold and different kinds of precious stones. Do not pay them any attention.
2::9::26::O fortunate Kaikeyi, make him recollect the two boons he had granted you in the war between gods and demons. You should not ignore your objective.  
2::9::27:: When Dasaratha personally lifts you from the floor and  asks  you what you want  you may make him settle down and ask him for these boons:
2::9::28::'O best of kings exile Rama into the forest for fourteen years and make Bharata king of the land'.
2::9::29::After Rama has been exiled into the forest for fourteen years your son grown strong and deeprooted will remain (king) for the rest of his life. 
2::9::30::O Devi demand Rama's exile as a boon. O lovely queen this way all the interests of your son will be fulfilled (protected).
2::9::31:: Thus, if Rama is exiled he will no longer be Rama (be able to cause delight to the people). Bharata will become king  with his enemy subdued.
2::9::32::By the time Rama returns from the forest, your son (now) confident, would have become deep rooted by gaining the company of friends and the acceptability of the people. 
2::9::33::I think the proper time has come (to ask for the boons). Without fear refrain the king forcibly from his intention of installing Rama.
2::9::34::Thus, having been made to accept the evil design as a beneficial objective, Kaikeyi  understood (the entire matter) and in delight spoke to Manthara.
2::9::35::That Kaikeyi, even though endowed with sound foresight, expressed her sense of wonder at the words of the hunchback and chose a wrong path like a young (immature) girl.
2::9::36::(She said) O hunchback, I never knew that you can speak such excellent words or decide  things intelligently. You are the best among the hunchbacks of this world.
2::9::37::O hunchback you alone always show interest in my affairs and seek my welfare. I might not have known the intended (deceptive) action of the king (without you).
2::9::38::There are many hunchbacks in this world, terribly ugly with their bodies misshaped and crooked. But you look beautiful like a lotus bent by the breeze.
2::9::39::Your breasts are thick and are as high as your shoulders. Beneath them lies your belly with its beautiful navel (waist) looking slender as if out of bashfulness.
2::9::40::You have full hips, round and plump breasts. Your countenance equals the bright moon. How passionate you look, Manthara
2::9::41::Your hips, glitter with the jingling girdle. Strong are the  calfs of your legs and long are your feet.
2::9::42::O Manthara when clad in silk garment you walk in front of me with your heavy thighs, you look like a female royal swan. 
2::9::43::In you reside a thousand deceitful means more than all the thousand mayas (tricks) of Sambara, king of the asuras, was capable of. 
2::9::44:: Your clever thoughts, magic powers and also the skills of kshatriyas are stored in your huge hump which is as wide as the hub of a chariot wheel.
2::9::45::O hunchback, with Rama gone to the forest and Bharata consecrated, I shall drape this hump with a golden garland.
2::9::46::O Manthara, when my objective is accomplished and I am fully satisfied, I will smear your hump with the best of refined liquid gold.
2::9::47::O Manthara, I shall get a tilaka made of gold for your auspicious, lovely face and shall also order exquisite ornaments (for you).
2::9::48::You shall move about wearing lovely garments like a goddess. With a peerless countenance, as if challenging the Moon and feeling proud, you will attain a state of eminence amidst your enemies.
2::9::49::Other hunchbacks adorned with all sorts of ornament shall also serve you in the same manner as you are serving me.
2::9::50::Flattered in this manner, Manthara addressed Kaikeyi who was lying on a white couch and looking like a flaming fire on the sacrificial altar:
2::9::51::O fortunate one construction of a dike is not undertaken after the water has flowed down. Act before the king to the best of your interest.
2::9::52::That beautiful, largeeyed Kaikeyi, puffed with the pride of her intoxicating beauty, encourged and influenced by the words of that hunchback, entered the chamber of wrath. She cast off her highly precious pearl necklace worth many hundreds of thousands (of rupees) and other costly, beautiful ornaments. Thereafter that goldenhued Kaikeyi lay down on the floor and said to Manthara: 
2::9::53::O hunchback, tell the king, either Bharata shall secure the kingdom on Rama's departure to the forest or else I will die here. 
2::9::54::I do not aspire for gold, nor gems nor ornaments. If Rama is installed, that will be the end of my life. 
2::9::55::Addressing queen Kaikeyi, the mother of Bharata, with extremely powerful words, that hunchback again made these utterances beneficial to Bharata and detrimental to Rama:
2::9::56::It is true that if Rama secures this kingdom, you along with your son are bound to suffer. O auspicious one, hence act in a way your son Bharata will be installed.
2::9::57::Repeatedly struck down by that hunchback's arrowsharp words greatly grieved queen Kaikeyi was inflamed against the king. Laying her hands on the chest again and again and expressing her amazement, she praised that hunchback.
2::9::58::Tell the king that he will see either the fulfilment of Bharata's desire after Rama is banished into the forest for a long period or me gone to Yama's abode. 
2::9::59::If Rama does not go from here to the forest, I want neither a bed nor garlands nor sandalpaste nor unguents nor food nor water nor even life. 
2::9::60::Saying these ruthless words, that lovely Kaikeyi cast off all her ornaments like a fallen  'kinnara' woman, and lay down on the floor with the carpet removed. 
2::9::61::Thus queen Kaikeyi's face enveloped by the darkness of violent anger and her body stripped of all valuable ornaments, she lay restless, looking like the dark sky without stars. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे नवमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends of the ninth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
