2::119::1::धर्मज्ञा knower of righteousness, अनसूया तु Anasuya on her part, ताम् all that, महतीं कथाम्  great narrative, श्रुत्वा having heard, मैथिलीम् Sita, शिरसि on head, आघ्राय having smelt, बाहुभ्याम् with arms, पर्यष्वजत embraced. 
2::119::2::त्वया by you, व्यक्ताक्षरपदम् with each word and each syllable uttered clearly, चित्रम्   wonderful, मधुरम् sweet, भाषितम् spoken, स्वयंवरम् the ceremony in which the bride chooses the groom of her own accord, यथा as, वृत्तम् it happened, तत्सर्वं all that, मया by me, श्रुतं हि has been heard, मधुरभाषिणि O sweetspeaking, Sita, ते your, कथया in the story, अहम् I, दृढम् रमे I enjoy  greatly. 
2::119::3::श्रीमान् resplendent, रविः Sun, शिवाम् auspicious, रजनीम् night, उपोह्य after drawing near, अस्तगतः has set, दिवसम् during day, आहारार्थम् for the sake of food, प्रतिकीर्णानाम् forage far and wide, सन्ध्याकाले in the twilight, निद्रार्थम् for the sake of sleep, निलीनानाम् resting, पतत्रिणाम् of birds, ध्वनिः sound, श्रूयते is heard. 
2::119::4::एते मुनयः च these sages, अभिषेकार्द्राः wet through ablution, कलशोद्यताः carrying waterpitchers, सलिलाप्लुतवल्कलाः their bark robes soaked with water, सहिता: in groups, उपवर्तन्ते are returning. 
2::119::5::ऋषीणाम् of the ascetics, अग्निहोत्रेषु  in Agnihotra sacrifices, विधिपूर्वकम् duly, हुतेषु oblations offered, कपोताङ्गारुणः tawny like the pigeon's body, धूमः smoke, पवनोद्धतः raised by the wind, दृश्यते is seen. 
2::119::6::समन्ततः on all sides, अल्पपर्णाः with sparse leaves, तरवः trees, घनीभूताः have grown dense, विप्रकृष्टेन्द्रिये with disturbed senses, अस्मिन् देशे in this region, दिशः the four quarters, न प्रकाशन्ति वै no longer look bright. 
2::119::7::रजनीचरसत्वानि the beings that range by night, समन्ततः everywhere, प्रचरन्ति are wandering, एते तपोवनमृगाः these deer of the penance grove, वेदितीर्थेषु around sacred altars, शेरते are sleeping. 
2::119::8::सीते O Sita, नक्षत्रसमलङ्कृता adorned with stars, निशा night, सम्प्रवृत्ता has commenced, ज्योत्स्नाप्रावरणः spread with the mantle of moonlight, चन्द्रः moon, अम्बरे in the sky, अभ्युदितः is rising, दृश्यते is appearing. 
2::119::9::गम्यताम् you may go now, अनुजानामि I give you my consent, रामस्य to Rama, अनुचरी भव be his companion, मधुरम् sweetly, कथयन्त्या storytelling, त्वया by you, अहम् I, परितोषिता  thoroughly contented.
2::119::10::मैथिलि O Sita, त्वम् you, मम my, प्रत्यक्षं तावत् in my presence, अलङ्कुरु adorn yourself, वत्से dear child, दिव्यालङ्कारशोभिता adorned with divine ornaments, मे to me, प्रीतिम् delight, जनय cause me. 
2::119::11::सुरसुतोपमा resembling the daughter of a god, सा सीता that Sita, तथा in that way, समलङ्कुत्य having adorned, तस्यै to her, शिरसा with her head, प्रणम्य saluting with reverence, रामम् to Rama, अभिमुखी towards, ययौ went. 
2::119::12::वदताम् among those eloquent one, वरः excellent, राघवः Rama, तथा in that way, भूषिताम्  adorned, सीताम् Sita, ददर्श beheld, तपस्विन्याः of the female ascetic, प्रीतिदानेन with gifts of love, जहर्ष च rejoiced. 
2::119::13::मैथिली the princess of Mithila, सीता Sita, ततः there after, तपस्विन्याः of ascetic Anasuya, प्रीतिदानम् gifts of love, वसनाभरणस्रजम् raiment, jewellery and garlands, सर्वम् everything, रामाय to Rama, न्यवेदयत् related. 
2::119::14::रामः Rama, महारथः great charioteer, लक्ष्मणश्च Lakshmana also, मानुषेषु among mortals, सुदुर्लभाम् very difficult to obtain, मैथिल्याः to Sita, सत्क्रियाम् the honour, दृष्ट्वा having seen, प्रहृष्टः अभवत् was gratified.
2::119::15::ततः thereafter, शशिनिभाननः face like the Moon, रघुनन्दनः the descendant of Raghu, सिद्धैः by the acomplished, तापसैः by ascetics, अर्चितः hospitality having been extended, प्रीतः in delight, पुण्याम् holy, तां शर्वरीम् that night, उवास passed. 
2::119::16::तस्याम् that, रात्र्याम् night, व्यतीतायाम् had passed away, नरव्याघ्रौ the two great men, अभिषिच्य having bathed, हुताग्निकान् who performed their fireofferings, वनगोचरान् inhabiting the  forest, तापसान् ascetics, अपृच्छेताम् took leave of.
2::119::17::वनचराः dwellers in the forest, धर्मचारिणः following the righteousness, ते तापसाः those ascetics, तस्य वनस्य of that forest, सञ्चारम् movement, राक्षसैः with demons, समभिप्लुतम्   inundated, तौ addressing both of them, ऊचुः said.
2::119::18::राघव O Rama, अस्मिन् महारण्ये in this great forest, पुरुषादानि maneaters, नानारूपाणि in various forms, रक्षांसि demons, रुधिराशनाः blooddrinking, व्यालाश्च wild animals, वसन्ति are living. 
2::119::19::राघव Rama, अस्मिन् महारण्ये in this great forest, उच्छिष्टं वा or impure, प्रमत्तं वा or not alert, तापसम् an ascetic, अदन्ति they (eat) devour, तान् them, निवारय prevent them. 
2::119::20::राघव Rama, एषः वने in the forest, फलानि fruits, आहरताम् of those gathering, महर्षीणाम् ascetics, एष पन्थाः this path, अनेन through this path, दुर्गम् impassable, वनम् the forest, गन्तुम् to go, ते to you, क्षमम् is safe. 
2::119::21::प्राञ्जलिभिः (paying obeisance) with folded hands, तपस्विभिः by ascetics, तैः द्विजैः by those brahmins, इतीव thus, कृतस्वस्त्ययनः obtaining their blessings, परन्तपः tormentor of enemies, राघवः Rama, सभार्यः with his wife, सलक्ष्मणः with Lakshmana, सूर्यः Sun, अभ्रमण्डलम् इव like entering the mass of clouds, वनम् forest, प्रविवेश entered. 
