2::5::1::नृपतिः the king, रामम् Rama, सन्दिश्य having instructed, पुरोहितम् priest, वशिष्ठम् Vasistha, समाहूय summoning, श्वः on the following day, भाविनि about to take place, अभिषेचने with regard to coronation, इदम् these words, अब्रवीत् spoke.
2::5::2::तपोधन O sage whose wealth is asceticism, गच्छ go, अद्य today, यतव्रतम् strictly observing vows, काकुत्स्थम् son of the family of Kakutstha (Rama), श्रीयशोराज्यलाभाय for securing prosperity, fame and kingdom, वध्वा सह along with my daughterinlaw, उपवासम् कारय advise him to undertake fast.
2::5::3::वेदविदाम् of those who know the Vedas, वरः best, मन्त्रकोविदः skilled in mantras, सुदृढव्रतः one who is firm in his vows, भगवान् venerable, सः वसिष्ठः that Vasistha, तथा इति Be it so, राजानाम् king, उक्त्वा having said, युक्तम् harnessed, ब्राह्मम् befitting a brahmin, रथवरम् best of chariots, आस्थाय having mounted, रामम् to Rama, मन्त्रवत् in accompaniment with mantras, उपवासयितुम् to make him fast, स्वयम् personally, रामनिवेशनम् to the abode of Rama, ययौ went.
2::5::4::सः मुनिसत्तमः that foremost of ascetics, पाण्डुराभ्रघनप्रभम् shining like a mass of white clouds beaming with brightness, रामभवनम् abode of Rama, प्राप्य having reached, तिस्रः three, कक्ष्याः yards, रथेनैव mounted on the chariot itself, विवेश entered.
2::5::5::सः रामः that Rama, मानार्हम् worthy of honour, आगतम् who arrived pale, तम् ऋषिम् to the sage (Vasistha), मानयिष्यन् to pay respect, त्वरन्निव quickly, ससम्भ्रमः in great excitement, निवेशनात् from his abode, निश्चक्राम came out.
2::5::6::मनीषिणः sagacious Vasistha's, रथाभ्याशम् near the chariot, त्वरमाणः hastening steps, अभ्येत्य having approached, ततः thereafter, रथात् from the chariot, स्वयम् personally , परिगृह्य holding(his hand), अवतारयामास got him alighted.
2::5::7::सः पुरोहितः च the family priest also, प्रियार्हम् lovable words, प्रश्रितम् humble, एनम् रामम् to this Rama, दृष्ट्वा having seen, संभाष्य having addressed him, अभिप्रसाद्य च and making him gratified, हर्षयन् causing him delight, इति thus, उवाच said.
2::5::8::राम O Rama, ते with you, पिता (your) father, प्रसन्नः welldisposed, यौवराज्यम् as  heirapparent, अवाप्स्यसि will obtain, भवान् you, अद्य today, सह सीतया with Sita, उपवासं करोतु undertake fast.
2::5::9::नराधिपः the king, पिता father, दशरथः Dasaratha, प्रातः early in the morning, त्वाम् you, नहुषः Nahusha, ययातिं यथा like Yayati, प्रीत्या with affection, यौवराज्ये as heirapparent, अभिषेक्ता हि will coronate .
2::5::10::सः मुनिः that ascetic(Vasistha), इति thus, उक्त्वा having spoken, यतव्रतम् observing vow, वैदेह्या सहितम्  together with Sita, रामम् Rama, तदा then, मन्त्रवत् in accompaniment with sacred hymns, उपवासम् fast, कारयामास made (to undertake).
2::5::11::ततः thereafter, राज्ञः king's, गुरुः preceptor, सः he, (Vasistha), रामेण by Rama, यथावत् duly, अर्चितः honoured, काकुत्स्थम् the descendant of Kakutstha (Rama), अभ्यनुज्ञाप्य having taken leave, रामनिवेशनात् from the abode of Rama, ययौ departed.
2::5::12::रामोऽपि Rama also, प्रियंवदैः talking affectionately, सुहृद्भि: सह in the company of friends, तत्र there, आसीनः being seated, अथ thereafter, सभाजितः having been honoured, सर्वशः in all ways, तान् them, अनुज्ञाप्य having taken leave, विवेश entered (his apartment).
2::5::13::तदा then, हृष्टनारीनरयुतम् filled with cheerful men and women, रामवेश्म Rama's residence, मत्तद्विजगणम् multitude of intoxicated birds, प्रफुल्लनलिनम् with fullblown lotuses, सरः यथा like a lake, बभौ was splendid.
2::5::14::सः वसिष्ठः that Vasistha, राजभवनप्रख्यात् resembling a royal palace, तस्मात् from that, रामनिवेशनात् abode of Rama, निर्गत्य having emerged, जनसंवृतम् filled with people, मार्गम् highway, ददृशे beheld.
2::5::15::अयोध्यायाम् in the city of Ayodhya, राजमार्गाः royal highways, समन्ततः on all sides, बृन्दबृन्दैः crowds of, कुतूहलजनैः by curious people, वृताः surrounded, अभिसम्बाधाः बभूवु: were jammed.
2::5::16::तदा then, जनबृन्दोर्मिसंघर्षहर्षस्वनवतः the exultation of the multitudes resembled the roar of the clashing of waves, राजमार्गस्य of the highways, निस्वनः sound, सागरस्येव like that of the roaring sea, बभूव emerged.
2::5::17::तदहः on that day, अयोध्यानगरी the city of Ayodhya, सिक्तसम्मृष्टरथ्या हि with thoroughfares sprinkled with water and swept, वनमालिनी surrounded with gardens, समुच्छ्रितगृहध्वजा आसीत् banners raised high on the houses.
2::5::18::तदा then, सस्त्रीबालाबलः with women, children, and weak, old persons, अयोध्यानिलयः living in Ayodhya, जनः people, रामाभिषेकम् coronation of Rama, आकाङ्क्षान् desiring, रवे: उदयम् sunrise, आकाङ्क्षत् eagerly desired.
2::5::19::प्रजालङ्कारभूतम् like an ornament for people, जनस्य for men, आनन्दवर्धनम् enhancing joy, तम् अयोध्यामहोत्सवम् that great festival of Ayodhya, द्रष्टुम् to witness, जनः men, उत्सुकः अभूत् became anxious.
2::5::20::पुरोहितः priest (Vasistha), एवम् in this way, जनसम्बाधम् thronged with men, तं राजमार्गम् that highway, तं जनौघम् crowds of men, व्यूहन्निव like dividing (into two tracts), शनैः slowly, राजकुलम् royal palace, ययौ went.
2::5::21::सः he, सिताभ्रशिखरप्रख्यम् looking like the peak of a mountain covered with white clouds, प्रासादम् royal palace, अधिरुह्य having ascended, बृहस्पतिः Brihaspati, शक्रेणेव like Indra, नरेन्द्रेण with king, समीयाय met.
2::5::22::नृपः king, आगतम् who had arrived, तम् him, अभिप्रेक्ष्य having seen, राजासनम् the throne, हित्वा after leaving, पप्रच्छ enquired, सः च he also, तत् that, कृतम् performed, इति thus, तस्मै him, अभ्यवेदयत् informed.
2::5::23::तदा then, सह आसीनाः seated with him, सभासदः courtiers, तेन तुल्यम् एव in the same way as he (Dasaratha) did, पुरोहितम् to the priest, पूजयन्तः to pay obeisance, आसनेभ्यः from their seats, समुत्तस्थुः rose.
2::5::24::राजा the king, गुरुणा by the preceptor, अभ्यनुज्ञातः having been permitted, तम्  मनुजौघम् that assembly of men, विसृज्य having disposed, सिंहः lion, गिरिगुहामिव like the cave of a mountain, अन्तःपुरम् inner apartment, विवेश entered.
2::5::25::पार्थिवः the king, अग्य्रवेषप्रमदाजनाकुलम् thronged with excellently attired women, महेन्द्रवेश्मप्रतिमम् equal to the palace of Mahendra, तं निवेशनम् that inner apartment, विदीपयन् illumining, चारु beautiful, तारागणसङ्कुलम् crowded with stars, नभः sky, शशीव like Moon, विवेश entered.
