2::52::1::As the night advanced towards dawn, broadchested Rama of great renown said to Lakshmana, son of Sumitra, who had auspicious marks on his body: 
2::52::2::O dear Lakshmana the holy night is over and it is time for sunrise. The deep dark bird, the cuckoo is singing.
2::52::3::Listen to the screams of the peacocks in the forest. The Ganga is flowing fast to merge in the sea. We need to cross it. 
2::52::4::In response to Rama's desire, Lakshmana, son of Sumitra, one who brings joy to his friends, called Guha and the charioteer (Sumantra) and stood before his brother. 
2::52::5::Having heard and accepted Rama's proposal, the king of the nisadas called his ministers at once and said: 
2::52::6::Get quickly to the sacred bank (of  Ganga) a strong, auspicious boat equipped with rowing rods and helmsmen who can help cross the river with ease
2::52::7::The ministers heard the orders, soon brought  a beautiful boat and informed Guha (that his orders have been carried out). 
2::52::8::Then Guha with folded palms said to Rama: O king, the boat ready. Tell me what else can I do for you.
2::52::9::O best among men, renowned like a god's son and constantly engaged in vows, here is the boat for you to cross the Ganga flowing into the sea. Do board it. 
2::52::10::Thereafter the radiant Rama said to Guha, You have fulfilled my desire. Keep all our belongings in the boat. 
2::52::11::Rama and Lakshmana then put on their quivers, fastened their swords and holding their bows went towards Ganga along with Sita.
2::52::12::The charioteer (Sumantra) approached the righteous Rama and asked him with folded hands: What can I do?
2::52::13::Rama then caressed  Sumantra with his right hand and said, Sumantra, go back immediately and never be inattentive in serving the king.
2::52::14::You have done enough. I shall now leave the chariot and walk into the great forest.
2::52::15::Having been permitted to go, Sumantra, the distressed charioteer, said to Rama, the best among men, and a descendant of the Ikshvaku race:
2::52::16::None else in this world would be able to live in the forest as you have resolved to, like a common man, along with your brother and spouse. 
2::52::17::If your celibacy and your grief are the consequences of your study of the Vedic lore, your compassionate nature and simplicity of character, I think there is no use of all these (virtues). 
2::52::18::Valiant scion of the Raghus dwelling in the forest along with Vaidehi (Sita) and brother Lakshmana you will attain the status as if you have won the three worlds.
2::52::19::Deprived of you, O Rama we will come under the control of that sinful Kaikeyi. We will suffer and die. 
2::52::20::Rama was like his (Sumantra's) own self. When Sumantra, the charioteer, saw that  Rama was preparing to go afar for a long time, he started weeping aloud in deep distress.
2::52::21::After the flow of tears ceased Sumantra took a sip of water and became sanctified. Then Rama addressed him with sweet words over and over again:
2::52::22::I find none else like you as friendly as you are to the Ikshvaku race. So do whatever you like  to see that king Dasaratha does not brood over me.
2::52::23::I tell you this because the lord of the earth (Dasaratha), is in deep distress. He is old. And he is under the control of his passion.
2::52::24::To make Kaikeyi  happy, do whatever little the great king Dasaratha orders you to do.
2::52::25::The minds of kings create no hurdles in all that they want to do. That is why they rule kingdoms.
2::52::26::Sumantra do things exactly in the manner the great king desires so that he does not feel sad or disappointed. 
2::52::27::After offering your salutations, tell these words, on my behalf, to the king who is respectable, bent with age and who has conquered his senses and never experienced any sorrow before. 
2::52::28::I do not regret my banishment from Ayodhya to live in the forest. Neither Lakshmana nor Sita does.
2::52::29::Very quickly these fourteen years will come to an end and we will return (to Ayodhya). Then you will see me, Lakshmana and Sita off and on. 
2::52::30::Having said this to the king, O Sumantra tell my mother, the other queens including Kaikeyi again and again about my wellbeing and the wellbeing of Lakshmana and Sita. Convey our respectful salutations at the feet of mother Kausalya.
2::52::31::Tell the king to send for Bharata quickly, and on his arrival, he be placed in the position of the king as per his own desire. 
2::52::32::On embracing Bharata and making him the crownprince the sorrow due to our departure will not affect you.
2::52::33::You should tell Bharata that just as he treats the king so should he treat all the mothers without differentiating betwen them.
2::52::34::Just as you treat Kaikeyi and Sumitra in a special manner, so should you treat Devi Kausalya, my mother.
2::52::35::Princeregency is awaiting you because of our father's loving desire. See that through you (your actions) he is able to attain happiness in both the worlds. 
2::52::36::When Sumantra was asked by Rama to go back, he grew griefstricken. Having heard all that was said by the scion of the Kakutsthas, he replied: 
2::52::37::I beg your pardon for what I have told you out of love. Accept it as the words of a devotee expressed without fear or formality. 
2::52::38::Without you how can I go back to the city (of Ayodhya) which, separated from you, is grieving like a lady who has lost her son? 
2::52::39::The people who had seen Rama board the chariot will be brokenhearted to see it without him.
2::52::40::Seeing the empty chariot the people of the city will look pitiable just like an army left only with the charioteer after its hero is killed in the war. 
2::52::41::Although living at a distance, the subjects feel in their minds that you are just ahead of them. Today they will certainly go without food, brooding over you. 
2::52::42::At the time of your departure, O Rama, you have seen all that happened, the hearts of the people exhausted with grief. 
2::52::43::You have witnessed the cry of agony raised by the citizens at the time of your banishment. Now when they see the (empty) chariot, they will make it (raise their cry) a hundredfold. 
2::52::44::What shall I say to Kausalya? Shall I say 'O venerable queen I have left your son at his maternal uncle's, hence don't grieve'. 
2::52::45::How can I lie to her? How can I tell her the unpleasent truth?   
2::52::46::How can these excellent horses who used to carry you and your friends till now draw this chariot without you even though they are at my command?
2::52::47::That is why, O sinless one I cannot go back to Ayodhya without you. Allow me to accompany you into your exile.
2::52::48::If you forsake me in spite of my request I shall immediately enter fire along with my chariot.
2::52::49::With my chariot I shall retaliate and prevent all those animals in the forest causing obstacles to your austerities, O Rama
2::52::50::By your grace I experienced the pleasure of driving your chariot, and by your grace, too, I am looking forward to deriving the pleasure of dwelling in the forest.
2::52::51::Be pleased. I wish to stay with you in the forest I long to hear from you these favourable words, 'Stay with me'. 
2::52::52::O valiant one, if these horses too could render services to you while you dwell in the forest, they would attain the supreme state. 
2::52::53:: As I dwell in the forest, I shall serve you with my head bowed. For this I may altogether relinquish Ayodhya or even heaven.
2::52::54:: Just as a sinner cannot enter the capital of Indra (heaven), it is impossible for me to enter Ayodhya without you.
2::52::55::It is my cherished desire to take you after the completion of your exile, back to the city (Ayodhya) in this chariot alone. 
2::52::56::If I accompany you into the forest, fourteen years will pass like a moment, otherwise it will seem like a hundred years. 
2::52::57::O Rama you are affectionate towards your servants. I abide in the path followed by you, my master's son. I am your devoted servant. It does not behove you to forsake me who is faithful.
2::52::58:: Repeatedly implored in various ways by the miserable Sumantra, Rama who is compassionate to his servants replied: 
2::52::59::O Sumantra, listen I know your deep devotion to me (I also know) you are loyal to your master (Dasaratha). So I am sending you to the city (Ayodhya) from here. 
2::52::60::When my younger mother Kaikeyi sees that you have returned to Ayodhya, she will believe that Rama has really gone to the forest.
2::52::61::If queen Kaikeyi is fully satisfied that I have gone to dwell in the forest, she will no longer have any doubt and will believe that righteous king Dasaratha is not a liar.
2::52::62::My prime resolve is that my younger mother should enjoy this prosperous and vast kingdom ruled by her son Bharata.
2::52::63::Sumantra, return to the city with the chariot for my pleasure and also for the pleasure of the king and convey to each of the persons concerned the message exactly as instructed. 
2::52::64::Having spoken to the charioteer and consoling him again and again, indefatigable Rama spoke to Guha words full of reasoning: 
2::52::65::Guha this forest where people live is not suitable for my stay. It is necessary that I live in a hermitage. So please do the needful. 
2::52::66::Seeking the welfare of my father, Sita and Lakshmana I shall enter the forest with matted hair and practise the prescribed austerities which are the adornments of ascetics. Do fetch me the sap of a banyan tree.
2::52::67::Guha fetched the latex quickly and gave it to the prince (Rama) and with that Rama matted his own hair and  Lakshmana's.
2::52::68::The longarmed Rama, the best of men, put on locks of matted hair. As the two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana stood dressed in bark wearing crowns of matted hair, they resembled two resplendent ascetics.
2::52::69::Having adopted the path of ascetics along with Lakshmana, Rama said to his friend Guha:
2::52::70::O Guha you must be vigilant about your army, treasury, forts and provinces. A kingdom, it is (rightly) said, is protected with great difficulty.
2::52::71::Rama, Delight of the Iksvakus, then permitted Guha to take leave. And departed quickly with his consort and Lakshmana in peace. 
2::52::72::Seeing the boat on the river bank and intending to cross the swiftly flowing Ganga, Rama, descendant of the Iksvakus said to Lakshmana:
2::52::73::O Lakshmana, the best of men the boat stands ready, get into it slowly (carefully), and then help the noble Sita board it by holding the beam (which balances the boat).
2::52::74::Having heard his brother's command the selfcontrolled Lakshmana did as he was told.He first helped Sita get into the boat and  thereafter boarded it himself.
2::52::75::With the boat boarded by the glorious Rama, Lakshmana's elder brother, Guha, king of the nishadas urged his kinsmen (to row the boat).
2::52::76::Resplendent Rama boarded the boat and muttered for his own safety mantras befitting brahmins and kshatriyas. 
2::52::77::Rama of undimmed radiance sipped the waters (of the Ganga) in accordance with the scriptures and with great pleasure and paid obeisance to the river with Sita and Lakshmana. 
2::52::78::Having permitted Sumantra and Guha with his army to leave, Rama seated on the boat urged the boatmen to proceed. 
2::52::79::The wellruddered boat rowed by the helmsmen and propelled by strong oars, swiftly crossed the waters of the river.
2::52::80::When the boat reached the midstream that unblemished Sita with palms folded invoked the river thus:
2::52::81::O Ganga, protected by you, this son (Rama) of Dasaratha, the sagacious maharaja, will carry out his father's command. He along with his brother will return after living in the forest for full fourteen years. O fortunate Devi, he will worship you in delight for fulfilling all his desires after his safe return.  
2::52::82::O Devi, you are Tripathaga, flowing in three directions (worlds). You behold the region of Brahma and happen to be the spouse of the king of the ocean in this world (of mortals). 
2::52::83::O Devi O lovely Ganga I offer you my obeisance and my adorations. After the safe return of Rama, the tiger (best) among men, from the forest and after he regains the kingdom I shall give a hundred thousand cows, clothing and delicious food to brahmins as a mark of regard, which will please you.
2::52::84::O Devi after my return to Ayodhya  purified by my austerities, I shall worship you by offering a thousand pots of nectar and food in the form of meat.
2::52::85::I shall worship all those deities inhabiting your banks and all sacred spots and temples.
2::52::86::O sacred one may the blemishless, mightyarmed Rama accompanied by me and his brother reenter Ayodhya after the exile.
2::52::87::While the unblemished, auspicious Sita was thus addressing (the river), the boat swiftly reached the south bank. 
2::52::88::Rama, the best of men and tormentor of enemies, after  reaching  the other side of the river, left the boat and proceeded with Sita and his brother.
2::52::89::The longarmed Rama then said to Lakshmana,  enhancer of the joy of Sumitra: Whether in populated areas  or in solitary places, excercise alacrity in the matter of protection. 
2::52::90:: In this desolate forest which we had never seen before we must certainly be concerned about our protection. O Lakshmana , let Sita follow you 
2::52::91::O best of men, I will follow you and Sita and keep watch. We must ensure  mutual protection.
2::52::92::We have not yet confronted any hardship. From now on Sita will come to know the difficulties of forest life.
2::52::93::Now she will enter the forest which is devoid of concourse of people, farms and pleasure groves and which is uneven and inaccessible and full of deep ditches.
2::52::94::Having heard the words of Rama, Lakshmana went ahead and Rama, delight of the Raghus, walked behind Sita.
2::52::95::The wretched Sumantra kept gazing at Rama who swiftly reached the other side of the Ganga and only when he could not see him because of long distance, he turned away his gaze and, overcome with grief, shed tears.
2::52::96::Having crossed that mighty river, the highsouled Rama, bestower of boons and equal in splendour, to the Protector of the world reached Vatsa by and by, a highly prosperous country inhabited by happy people.
2::52::97::Famished, they (Rama and Lakshmana) killed a boar, a rishya (whitefooted male antelope), a spotted deer and a great deer with black stripes. They partook the meat and reached a tree by evening where they rested for the night.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्विपञ्चाश स्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftysecond sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
