2::87::1::भरतः Bharata, भृशम् highly, अप्रियम् unpleasant, गुहस्य from Guha, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा having heard, तत् अप्रियम् that unpleasant, यत्र wherever, श्रुतम् was heard, तत्रैव there only, ध्यानम्  thought, जगाम obtained. 
2::87::2::सुकुमारः delicate, महासत्त्वः highly energetic, सिंहस्कन्धः with shoulders like that of a lion, महाभुजः mightyarmed, पुण्डरीकविशालाक्षः wideeyed like lotus petals, तरुणः youthful, प्रियदर्शनः of graceful appearance, मुहूर्तं कालं तु for a moment, प्रत्याश्वस्य having revived, परमदुर्मनाः with deeply distressed mind, तोत्रैः by whips, अतिविद्धः smitten, द्विपः इव like an elephant, सहसा at once, पपात fell down.
2::87::3::अनन्तरस्थितः standing close by, शत्रुघ्नः Satrughna, तदवस्थम् in this state, भरतम् Bharata, परिष्यज्य having embraced, शोककर्शितः smitten with grief, विसंज्ञः having lost his senses,  उच्चैः loudly, रुरोद cried.
2::87::4::ततः thereafter, उपवासकृशाः emaciated due to fasting, दीनाः desolate, भर्तृव्यसनकर्शिताः afflicted by the calamity of their husband's death, सर्वाः all, भरतस्य Bharata's, ताः मातरः  mothers, समापेतुः rushed towards him. 
2::87::5::ताश्च all of them, रुदन्त्य: sobbing, भूमौ on the ground, पतितम् fallen, तम् him, पर्यवारयन् surrounded, कौसल्या तु as for Kausalya, दुर्मनाः in a depressed mind, अनुसृत्य approaching, एनम् that Bharata, परिषस्वजे took him into her arms.
2::87::6::शोकलालसा distressed in grief, तपस्विनी desolate, वत्सला with filial love, रुदन्ती weeping, स्वम् her own, वत्सं यथा like child, उपगूह्य clasping, भरतम् Bharata, परिपप्रच्छ enquired.  
2::87::7::पुत्र O son, व्याधिः illness, ते शरीरम् your body, कच्चित् न परिबाधते is not troubling, I hope, अद्य now, अस्य राजकुलस्य of this royal house, जीवितम् life, त्वदधीनं हि is dependent on you. 
2::87::8::पुत्र O son, सभ्रातृके along with your brother, Lakshmana, रामे Rama, गते having  gone, राज्ञि king, दशरथे Dasaratha, वृत्ते had departed, त्वाम् you, दृष्ट्वा seeing, जीवामि I am living, अद्य now, त्वम् you, एकः alone, नः for us, नाथः are protector. 
2::87::9::पुत्र O son, लक्ष्मणे relating to Lakshmana, सहभार्ये with his wife, वनम् to the forest, गते had gone, एकपुत्रायाः of me having only one son, पुत्रे वा or relating to Rama, किंचित् even  little, अप्रियम् unpleasant news, ते to you, कच्चित् न श्रुतम् is not heard, I hope not.
2::87::10::महायशाः of great renown, सः that Bharata, मुहूर्तम् for a moment, समाश्वस्य composing himself, कौसल्याम् Kausalya, परिसान्त्वेद्यं reassuring, रुदन्नेव still weeping, गुहम् to Guha, वचनम् these words, अब्रवीत् said. 
2::87::11::गुह O Guha, मे भ्राता my brother, रात्रौ in the night, क्व where, अवसत् did he dwell, सीता Sita, क्व where did she stay, लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, क्व where did he stay, किम् what, भुक्त्वा  having eaten, कस्मिन् in which, शयने couch, अस्वपत् did he sleep, मे to me, शंस tell me.
2::87::12::निषादाधिपतिः overlord of the nishadas, सः गुहः that Guha, हृष्टः delighted, प्रियहिते beloved  friend, अतिथौ guest, रामे relating to Rama, यद्विधम् in whatever way, प्रतिपेदे all that he had  provided, भरतम् to Bharata, अब्रवीत् said.  
2::87::13::मया by me, रामाय to Rama, अभ्यवहारार्थम् for the purpose of meal, उच्चावचम् of various kinds, अन्नम् rice, भक्षाः eatables, विविधानि of several kinds, फलानि च fruits also, बहु in great quantity, उपहृतम् was brought.
2::87::14::सत्यपराक्रमः a man with truth as prowess, रामः Rama, तत्सर्वम् all that, प्रत्यनुज्ञासीत् acknowledged ordered, सः he, क्षत्रधर्मम् the duty of a kshatriya, अनुस्मरन् remembering, तत् all that, न तु प्रत्यगृह्णात् did not accept it.
2::87::15::राजन् O king, सखे O friend, आस्माभिः by us, न प्रतिग्राह्यम् should not be received, सर्वदा always, देयम् should be given, इति thus, महात्मना by the great, तेन by him, वयम् we, अनुनीताः were entreated.
2::87::16::महायशाः the illustrious one, राघवः Rama, तदा then, लक्ष्मणेन by Lakshmana, समानीतम् brought by, वारि water, सीतया सह with Sita, पीत्वा after drinking, औपवास्यम् fasting, अकार्षीत्  undertook. 
2::87::17::ततः तु thereafter, तदा then, लक्ष्मणोऽपि Lakshmana also, जलशेषेण with the remainder of the water, अकरोत् satisfied his hunger, ते त्रयः those three, वाग्यताः observing silence, संहिताः intently, सन्ध्याम् evening worship, समुपासत performed. 
2::87::18::ततः पश्चात् thereafter, सौमित्रिस्तु son of Sumitra on his part, स्वयम् himself, बर्हींषि darbha grass, आनीय having brought, राघवकारणात् for the sake of Rama, क्षिप्रम् quickly, शुभम् auspicious, स्वास्तरम् comfortable bed, अकरोत् prepared.
2::87::19::रामः Rama, तस्मिन् on that, स्वास्तरे bed, सीतया सह with Sita, समाविशत् lay down, लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana,  तयोः their, पादौ feet, प्रक्षाल्य having washed, अपचक्राम left for a distant place.
2::87::20::रामश्च Rama as well as, सीता Sita, उभौ both, तां रात्रिम् that night, यस्मिन् where, शयितौ slept, तत् that, इंगुदीमूलम् foot of the ingudi tree, एतत् this only, तत् that, तृणं च grass bed, इदमेव this one only. 
2::87::21::परन्तपः scorcher of enemies, लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, तलाङ्गुलित्रवान् wearing protective covering for his palms and fingers (made of gohaskin), शरैः arrows, सुपूर्णौ filled with,  इषुधी two quivers, पृष्ठे on his back, नियम्य strapping, सज्यम् furnished with string, महत् great, धनुः bow, उपोह्य holding, निशाम् during that night, अस्य Rama's, परितः  surrounding, अतिष्ठत् केवलम् stood throughout.
2::87::22::ततः thereafter, अहं तु as for me, तदा then, उत्तमबाणचापधृत् holding the best of arrows and bow, अतन्द्रितैः with the indefatigable, आत्तकार्मुकैः armed with bows, ज्ञातिभिः with my kinsmen, महेन्द्रकल्पम् comparable to Indra, परिपालयन् while protecting, लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, यत्र wherever, तत्र there, स्थितः अभवम् remained standing.
