2::20::1:: When the tiger among men (Rama) was coming out with folded palms, there arose a huge cry of distress among the ladies of the harem:
2::20::2::Rama was the refuge and protector of all the inmates lot of the inner apartment although it was not his duty nor was he forced by his father to safeguard them. That Rama is now going on exile. 
2::20::3:: Rama conducted himself towards us in the same way as he did towards his mother Kausalya right from the begining.
2::20::4::Rama who used to avoid deeds that caused anger, pacified those who were angry with him, and never lost his cool even when cursed, that Rama is going on exile today.
2::20::5::Alas our king who has lost his brain, who has ordered the banishment of Rama, the refuge of all living beings, (on the other hand) is moving about in the world.
2::20::6:: Thus all the queens like calfless cows cried loudly blaming their husband.
2::20::7::Tormented with grief on account of his son, the king sank in his seat on hearing the cries of distress from the inner apartment
2::20::8:: Deeply pained yet selfpossessed Rama, heaving sighs like an elephant went towards the inner apartment of his mother along with his brother.
2::20::9::Rama beheld a highly venerable elderly man seated at the entrance of the residence and many others standing (nearby).
2::20::10::On seeing Rama, all the eminent among the victors got up immediately and greeted him, saying, 'Victory to you'.
2::20::11::With the first courtyard crossed, Rama saw in the second aged brahmins versed in the Vedas, and duly honoured by the king.
2::20::12::Rama wished the brahmins and saw old men, women and children vigilantly guarding the door in the third courtyard.
2::20::13::Wellpleased, the women then greeted him wishing prosperity. They hurried into the abode of Kausalya and gave her the happy news (of Rama's arrival).
2::20::14:: Having spent the night with a composed mind (abosorbed in meditation), Kausalya was worshipping lord Visnu in the early morning to secure her son's welfare.
2::20::15::Always engaged in the observance of vows, Kausalya (then) clad in silk cloth was performing rituals of auspiciousness, offering oblations to the firegod in accordance with mantras (Vedic hymns).
2::20::16::Rama entered the auspicious inner apartment of his mother and saw her exhorting the priests to offer sacrificial oblations to Agni (firegod).
2::20::17::There Rama saw  curd, grains of rice, clarified butter, sweetmeats, oblations, parched grain, white garlands, porridge of cooked rice mixed with sesame seeds, sacrirficial faggots, vessels filled with water, etc. kept ready for religious rites.
2::20::18::Kausalya, emaciated due to observance of vows and clad in white silk looked like a celestial being. She was engaged in offering libations to the deities.
2::20::19::Seeing her son who had come after a long time and who is a source of joy to his mother, Kausalya approached him with great delight like a mare to her young calf.
2::20::20:: The scion of the Raghus saw his mother coming and bowed her. She held him in both her arms and kissed his forehead.
2::20::21:: Out of love for her son, the invincible scion of the Raghu dynasty, Kausalya spoke with gentle and pleasant words:
2::20::22:: May you attain long life and fame like those of the aged, virtuous and great rajarsis  who upheld the righteousness in the race.
2::20::23::O scion of the Raghu race see the king, your righteous and truthful father, who will consecrate you as princeregent today itself.
2::20::24::Invited (by Kausalya) to partake the food, Rama out of abashment only touched the seat provided to him and having stretched his folded palms spoke to his mother.
2::20::25::Modest by nature, Rama with respectful humility began seeking her permission for his departure to Dandaka forest:
2::20::26::O mother surely you do not know that a great misfortune has befallen, causing distress to you, Sita and Lakshmana, too.
2::20::27::I am setting forth to Dandaka forest.  What is this seat for? A time has come for me when I am fit for a seat of kusa grass.
2::20::28:: Abstaining from eating meat like hermits and living on honey, fruits and roots, I am to live in the solitary forest for fourteen years.
2::20::29::The great king is conferring the status of heirapparent on Bharata while he is banishing me to Dandaka forest to live like an ascetic.
2::20::30::Living on things available in the forest, on fruits and roots, I am to dwell in the uninhabited jungle for fourteen years.
2::20::31:: All on a sidden Kausalya fell down on the ground like the branch of a sal tree in the forest severed by an axe, like a goddess dropped from heaven.
2::20::32::Seeing his mother who had done nothing to deserve (this) suffering and who had fallen down like a plantain tree, deprived of her senses, Rama raised her up (from the ground).
2::20::33::Rama gently wiped away the dust that had covered her body as Kausalya stood miserable, like a mare who stands up after having rolled on the ground while pulling the load. 
2::20::34::Kausalya who deserved happiness yet was struck down by (this) distress spoke to Rama, the tiger among men who was sitting nearby, while Lakshmana was listening.
2::20::35::O my son, if you were not born to me, I, even as a woman without  progeny, would not have experienced grief, more intense than this.
2::20::36:: O my son a barren woman has only one mental agony that she has no progeny.  Except that she does not have any other sorrow.
2::20::37:: I did not have the fortune, O Rama, to enjoy any auspicious moment or pleasure earlier when my husband was in authority. I exist with the hope that I will have it when my son assumes authority. 
2::20::38::I, being the eldest (of the queens) will have to listen to many heartbreaking and unpleasant words from my fellowwives who are younger to me.
2::20::39:: There cannnot be greater distress for any woman than such unending grief and lamentation (which I am now experiencing).
2::20::40::O child even when you are nearby I am neglected like this. What to say when you are banished. Death is certain to me.
2::20::41::Treating me as an equal or inferior to the attendants of Kaikeyi and making me always dependent, my husband has greatly suppressed me.
2::20::42::Any one who serves me or follows me will not talk to me after seeing Bharata (installed as heirapparent).
2::20::43::Fallen into an unfortunate state how can I look at Kaikeyi's face who is always harsh and in temper? 
2::20::44::O Rama, I have spent the last seventeen years after your birth with the expectaion that my sorrows would come to an end.
2::20::45::Therefore, O Rama, I cannot at this old age endure this great, endless sorrow and the insults from cowives for long. 
2::20::46:: Without beholding your face that is as bright as the full Moon, how can this wretched woman live this pitiable life?
2::20::47:: Through meditation, through fasts and with a great deal of efforts you have been brought up by this luckless (mother). But alas this is all in vain.
2::20::48:: I think my heart must be very firm (hard) like the bark of a great river which, touched by (a flood of) fresh water in the rainy season does not disintegrate.
2::20::49::There is no room for me in the abode of Yama (the god of death). If he does not carry me off forcibly like a lion carrying away a crying female deer, certainly there is no death for me. 
2::20::50::Surely my still (hard) heart is made of iron. It neither bursts nor breaks down on the ground. Pervaded by grief, there is no untimely death for this my body, too.
2::20::51:: My regret is that all my mortifications, gifts of charity and penances are of no avail. Even the asceticism which I practised for the sake of progeny was fruitless like a seed sown in a barren land.
2::20::52::If any one, tormented with great sorrow, could willingly commit suicide I would have gone the way to the assembly of Yama (the lord of death) right away as without you I will be now like a cow without a calf.
2::20::53::What is the use of this life now? What is life without you whose countenance glows like the full Moon? Like a cow emaciated by its search for the calf, I will follow you into the forest.
2::20::54:: Kausalya, filled with anger due to extreme sorrow reflected over her misfortune, and burst into harrowing tears, looking at Rama, like a kinnari looking at her grownup son taken captive. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे विंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentieth sarga of Ayodhyakanda of the the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
