2::42::1::As long as the dust raised by the wheels of the chariot of Rama (who was departing to the forest) was visible, Dasaratha, the best of the Ikshvakus, could not withdraw his eyes (from  Rama).
2::42::2:: So long as king Dasaratha was able to see his exceedingly virtuous and beloved  son (Rama), it appeared that his body kept rising from the earth to have a sight of his son.
2::42::3::When the king could no longer see even the dust, he fell on the ground, despondent and grief stricken.
2::42::4::Kausalya reached for the right hand of Dasaratha (to raise him up) and Kaikeyi the beloved (mother) of Bharata reached for his left.
2::42::5::The king, endowed with rectitude, virtue and also humility, stared at  and said to Kaikeyi with pain.
2::42::6::O Kaikeyi you are a woman of evil conduct. Do not touch my body. I do not wish to see you. You are not my wife or my relation.
2::42::7::Your dependents have nothing to do with me nor I with them. I denounce you since you are a selfseeker without any sense off righteousness. 
2::42::8:: I renounce the relationship established with you through marriage by taking your hand and circumambulating the fire, both in this world and in the next.
2::42::9:: If Bharata feels pleased to secure this imperishable kingdom, then may his obsequial offerings at my funeral not reach me 
2::42::10::Then Kausalya, emaciated due to sorrow, lifted the king who was thoroughly coated with dust and returned to the palace.
2::42::11:: That virtuous Dasaratha, recalling (the sight of) his son with the robes of an ascetic, burned with remorse as if he had intentionally slain a brahmin or placed his hand in fire.  
2::42::12::Turning back again and again at the trail of (Rama's) chariot, the grieving king appeared lustreless like the Sun in eclipse. 
2::42::13:: The griefstricken king began to lament thinking of his beloved son, and (suddenly) realizing that his son had crossed the limits of the city, said:
2::42::14:: I can see the marks of the hooves of the splendid horses carrying my son on the highway but not that magnanimous Rama.
2::42::15::Rama, the best of all my sons who, smeared with sandalpaste and fanned by graceful women used to sleep (with his head) on comfortable cushions will surely, from now on, lie down somewhere at the foot of a tree, (his head) pillowed upon a piece of wood or stone. 
2::42::16::That unfortunate Rama, having been covered with dust, will get up from the ground sighing like a bull elephant rising from mount Prasravana.
2::42::17::Surely the forestrovers will be gazing upon the longarmed Rama, protector of the world, as he rises (from the ground) and wanders in the jungle unprotected. 
2::42::18::Sita, beloved daughter of Janaka, who is accustomed to comforts, will now wander in the forest troubled by piercing thorns.
2::42::19::Sita who knows not the forest will now live in terror, listening to the hairraising, horrible roars of wild animals.
2::42::20::O Kaikeyi, your desire is fulfilled.  Rule the kingdom as a widow. Without Rama, the best of men, I don't desire to live.
2::42::21::Thus the king, who looked like one after the inauspicious (funeral) bath, surrounded by streams of people entered the most beautiful city (Ayodhya) which portended misfortune. 
2::42::22:: There the mansions and squares on the highways were all deserted. The temples and marketplaces were closed. The people were weak, fatigued and tormented with grief. The highways were not much crowded. Having seen such a sight of the city on all sides, lamenting and brooding over Rama, Dasaratha entered his palace like the Sun plunging into a cloud.
2::42::23:: The palace without Rama, Lakshmana and Sita, stood like a vast, unperturbed lake with serpents snatched away by Suparna (Garuda).
2::42::24::Thereupon Dasaratha lamenting with his throat choked addressed (his attendants) in a low, feeble, melancholic, gentle voice:
2::42::25:: Take me quickly to the apartment of Rama's mother, Kausalya. There is no other place where my heart can find solace.
2::42::26::Having heard the king, the doorkeepers took  him to the apartment of Kausalya and  there respectfully made him rest. 
2::42::27:: His mind tossed restlessly although he entered Kausalya's palace and climbed into the couch. 
2::42::28::To the king, the palace deserted by his two sons and his daughterinlaw, seemed like the sky without the Moon.
2::42::29::The valiant maharaja looked around that palace, lifted up his arms and shouted in a loud voice, Oh scion of the Raghus (Rama) you have forsaken me.
2::42::30::Oh how fortunate are those best of men who will live until that time to see Rama return and embrace him.
2::42::31::In the middle of the night which, for him, felt like the night of death Dasaratha said to Kausalya thus: 
2::42::32::O Kausalya, my sight that had followed Rama has not yet returned. I cannot see you clearly. Please touch me with your hand.
2::42::33::Having seen the king in bed brooding over Rama, the queen, (Kausalya), sitting by his side, sighed and lamented, deeply anguished. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे द्विचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortysecond sarga of Ayodhyakanda of  the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
