2::99::1::Eager to see his brother, Bharata encamped the army and set out showing the hermitage to Satrughna.
2::99::2::Bharata, deeply devoted towards elders, indicated to sage Vasistha to bring along the mothers, and  proceeded ahead quickly.
2::99::3::Sumantra, who was overeager, like Bharata, to see Rama, followed Satrughna who was not far from him.
2::99::4:: While walking, Bharata beheld a hut made of leaves looking like a hermit's cottage.
2::99::5::In front of that hut Bharata beheld shattered logs of wood and also flowers plucked.
2::99::6::Bharata beheld here and there knots of kusa grass and strips of bark tied on trees as signs to ascertain the way to the hermitage of Rama and Lakshmana.
2::99::7::He also beheld large heaps of dried cakes of dung of buffaloes and deer for use against cold in the forest.
2::99::8::Walking on, the longarmed, effulgent and delighted Bharata said to Satrughna and the ministers surrounding him:
2::99::9::We must have reached the region about which Bharadwaja had spoken. I think river Mandakini is not far from here.
2::99::10::Here are long bark garments fastened on lofty places as marks of identification left by Lakshmana, to locate the path at odd times which may be needed while going out.
2::99::11::This must be the place on the hillside on which mighty tuskers wander about trumpeting and charging at one another.
2::99::12::Here is the thick smoke emanating from the blacktrailed fire maintained perpetually by the ascetics living in the forest.
2::99::13::I shall see here with a delighted heart the venerable Rama, the best of men, who renders great hospitality (to elders) and who resembles a maharshi.
2::99::14::Bharata walked for a short distance towards mount Chitrkuta when he reached river Mandakini. And then said to his ministers:
2::99::15::Rama, the lord of men, a tiger among men, is sitting on the ground in a 'heroic' (yogic) posture in this secluded forest. O fie upon my birth and my life
2::99::16::Effulgent Rama, the lord of the world, had to renounce all desires and undergo this calamity of living in the forest on my account.
2::99::17::Reviled by the world, I shall now fall at the feet of Sita, Rama and Lakshmana seeking their grace.
2::99::18::Lamenting in this way Bharata beheld in that forest an excellent, sacred and enchanting hut covered with a lot of leaves of sala, palmyra and aswakarna trees like a sacrificial altar spread with soft kusa grass. Goldplated bows that resembled the thunderbolt of Indra, powerful and capable of achieving great targets and oppressing the enemies, adorned the hut. Arrows glittering like the rays of the Sun, were dreadful, with blazing heads and stored in quivers adorned it like the hooded serpents illumining the city of Bhogavati (in the nether world). A pair of swords in scabbards made of excellent silver, two shields of different colours with golden spots, fingerguards made of skin of iguana decorated with gold were hanging there. It was impregnable to enemy hordes like the cave of a lion to the deer.
2::99::19::Lamenting in this way Bharata beheld in that forest an excellent, sacred and enchanting hut covered with a lot of leaves of sala, palmyra and aswakarna trees like a sacrificial altar spread with soft kusa grass. Goldplated bows that resembled the thunderbolt of Indra, powerful and capable of achieving great targets and oppressing the enemies, adorned the hut. Arrows glittering like the rays of the Sun, were dreadful, with blazing heads and stored in quivers adorned it like the hooded serpents illumining the city of Bhogavati (in the nether world). A pair of swords in scabbards made of excellent silver, two shields of different colours with golden spots, fingerguards made of skin of iguana decorated with gold were hanging there. It was impregnable to enemy hordes like the cave of a lion to the deer.
2::99::20:: Bharata beheld at Rama's residence a sacred and spacious altar sloping to the northeast, with a burning fire upon it.
2::99::21::Bharata looked around for a moment and saw his esteemed brother Rama seated in that thatched cottage wearing matted locks of hair.
2::99::22::He saw Rama, lord of the oceanbound earth, seated like blazing fire, clad in antelope skin and garment of bark, with long arms and shoulders like a lion and eyes like white lotuses. The mightyarmed warrior seemed like Brahma, the creator and the eternal, protector of righteousness. Accompanied by Sita and Lakshmana Rama sat on the bare ground strewn with darbha grass.
2::99::23:: Beholding Rama, Bharata the majestic and righteous son of Kaikeyi overwhelmed with grief and distress rushed towards him.
2::99::24::On seeing Rama, Bharata could not control his grief with patience and lamented in great anguish and with words choked with tears said:
2::99::25:: My elder brother who deserves to be attended by ministers and other subjects in the royal assembly sits here today in the forest surrounded by wild beasts.
2::99::26:: Such magnanimous Rama, a follower of dharma, accustomed to be attired in  thousands of dresses in the past now clad in two deer skins, is practising righteousness.
2::99::27::How is it that Rama who used to wear variegated flowers formerly, now bears these heavy matted locks?
2::99::28::That Rama, who in accordance with tradition deserves accredition of religious merit through sacrifices now seeks it through mortification of body.
2::99::29::How is it that the body of my venerable brother which was once smeared with expensive, fragrant sandal paste is now covered with dust?
2::99::30::It is on my account that Rama who was accustomed to all comforts has fallen into this misfortune. Fie on my life of cruelty which is condemned by the world.
2::99::31::Thus Bharata lamented in misery and with his lotuslike countenanace sweating  before reaching Rama's feet fell down, crying in distress.
2::99::32::Mighty prince Bharata, oppressed with grief, could only say, O Arya (venerable one) And in distress could not speak any more.
2::99::33::As he beheld the glorious Rama, with his throat choken with tears, he cried out, O Arya (venerable one) and thereafter, was unable to speak any more.
2::99::34:: Satrughna also prostrated himself at the feet of tearful Rama who embraced both of them.
2::99::35::Thereafter, princes Rama and Lakshmana joined Sumantra and Guha in the forest like the Sun and the Moon meeting the planets Sukra and Brihaspati in the sky.
2::99::36::On seeing the princes now assembled in the great forest like mighty leaders of elephant herds, inhabitants of the forest had nothing but tears of grief, not joy, to shed.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे एकोनशततमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the ninetyninth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
