2::58::1::अथ thereafter, राजा king, यदा when, प्रत्याश्वस्तः consoled, मोहात् from loss of consciousness, पुनः again, प्रत्यागतम् having regained his senses, रामवृत्तान्त कारणात् due to the news about Rama, तं सूतम् that charioteer, आजुहाव called for him.
2::58::2::अथ then, सूतः the charioteer, कृताञ्जलिः with folded palms, राममेव Rama alone, अनुशोचन्तम् thinking of Rama, दुःखशोकसमन्वितम् by grief and sorrow, वृद्धम्  aged, परमसन्तप्तम् deeply afflicted, नवग्रहम् newlycaptured, द्विपमिव like an elephant, विनिःश्वसन्तम् heaving deep sighs, अस्वस्थम् indisposed, कुञ्जरमिव like an elephant, ध्यायन्तम् brooding, महाराजम् king, उपस्थितः approached.
2::58::3::राजा king, रजसा with dust, ध्वस्ताङ्गम् covered all over, अश्रुपूर्णमुखम् face bathed in tears, दीनम् dejected, समुपस्थितम् standing nearby,  सूतम् charioteer, परमार्तवत् filled with extreme grief, उवाच said.
2::58::4::सूत the charioteer, धर्मात्मा righteous (Rama), वृक्षमूलम् foot of the tree, उपाश्रितः having taken refuge, क्वनु where, वत्स्यति will he live?, अत्यन्त सुखितः enjoyed supreme luxury, स: राघवः that Rama, किम् what?, अशिष्यति will he eat?
2::58::5::सुमन्त्र Sumantra, दुःखस्य to sorrow, अनुचितः not deserving, शयनोचितः accustomed to comfortable couches, भूमिपालात्मजः son of the guardian of the earth (prince Rama),  अनाथवत् like an orphan, भूमौ on the ground, दुःखम् sadly, कथम् how?, शेते can lie down?
2::58::6::यान्तम् when he went out, यम् whom, पदातिरथकुञ्जरा: footsoldiers, chariots and elephants, अनुयान्ति स्म followed, सः that, रामः Rama, विजनम् desolate, वनम् forest, आश्रितः having taken shelter, कथम् how, वत्स्यति can live.
2::58::7::कुमारौ the two youths (Rama and Lakshmana), वैदेह्या सार्धम् with Vaidehi also, व्यालैः by wicked wild elephants, मृगैः animals, आचरितम् ranging about, कृष्णसर्पनिषेवितम् abounding in black cobras, वनम् forest, कथम् how, उपस्थितौ exist.
2::58::8::सुमन्त्र Sumantra, राजपुत्रौ king's sons, सुकुमार्या along with delicate, तपस्विन्या by the pitiable, सीतया सह with Sita, रथात् from the chariot, पादैः on foot, अवरुह्य  alighting, कथम् how, गतौ did they go.
2::58::9::सूत O charioteer, येन by you, अश्विनौ Aswinis, मन्दरम् इव like Mandara mountain, वनान्तम् on the outskirts of the forest, प्रविशन्तौ entering, मम my, आत्मजौ sons, दृष्टौ have been seen, त्वम् you, सिद्धार्थः खलु are blessed indeed.
2::58::10::सुमन्त्र Sumantra, वनम् forest, आसाद्य on reaching, रामः Rama, किम् what?, वचः words, उवाच did speak, लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, किम् what, उवाच did say, मैथिली च and Sita, किम् what, उवाच did say.
2::58::11::सूत charioteer, रामस्य Rama's, आसितम् seat, शयितम् bed, भुक्तम् food, कीर्तय describe, अहम् I, ययातिः Yayati, साधुषु इव as in the company of saints, एतेन with this, जीविष्यामि shall live.
2::58::12::नरेन्द्रेण by the king, Dasaratha, इति in this way, बोधितः questioned, सः सूतः that charioteer, बाष्पपरिबद्धया with voice choked with tears, सज्जमानया faltering with grief, वाचा  with words, राजानम् to the king, उवाच said. 
2::58::13::महाराज O great king, राघवः the descendant of the Raghu race (Rama), धर्ममेव righteousness also, अनुपालयन् guarding, अञ्जलिम् with folded hands, कृत्वा having set, शिरसा bowing his head, अभिप्रणम्य च offering  salutations, माम् to me, अब्रवीत् said.
2::58::14::सूत O charioteer, मद्वचनात् as my words, विदितात्मनः knower of the self, महात्मनः illustrious, वन्दनीयस्य worthy of salutations, तस्य that, तातस्य father's, पादौ feet, शिरसा head, वन्द्यौ are worthy of salutations.
2::58::15::सूत O charioteer, त्वया by you, मद्वचनात् at my words, सर्वम् entire, अन्तःपुरम् inmates of the inner apartment, अविशेषेण without distinction, आरोग्यम् wellbeing, यथार्हम् befitting their status, अभिवादनं च salutations, वाच्यम् fit to be conveyed.
2::58::16::मम my, माता mother, कौसल्या Kausalya, कुशलम् welfare, अभिवादनं च salutations, अप्रमादं च  alertness, वक्तव्या is worthy of conveying, इदम् this, वचश्च word, ब्रूयाः tell.
2::58::17::देवि O mother, धर्मनित्या adhering to the righteous path, यथाकालम् in time, अग्न्यगारपरा भव perform the rituals in the chamber of sacrificial fire, देवस्य (your) lord's (king Dasaratha's), पादौ च feet also, देववत् like a god, परिपालय serve.
2::58::18::अभिमानं च egoism, मानं च pride, मातृषु towards mothers, वर्तस्व conduct yourself, अम्ब O mother, आर्याम् venerable, कैकेयीम् Kaikeyi, राजानम् अनु welldisposed towards the king, कारय mould her.
2::58::19::कुमारे young, भरते towards Bharata, राजवत् like a king, वृत्ति: conduct, वर्तितव्या to be followed, राजानः kings, अर्थज्येष्ठाः हि senior by virtue of their royalty, राजधर्मम् prerogative of kings, अनुस्मर remember.
2::58::20::भरतः Bharata, कुशलम् welfare, वाच्यः deserves to be told, मद्वचनेन by my word, वाच्यः च  is to be told, सर्वासु among all, मातृषु mothers, यथान्यायम् rightly, वृत्तिम् behaviour, वर्तस्व follow.
2::58::21::इक्ष्वाकुकुलनन्दनः delight of the race of Ikshvaku, महाबाहुः mightyarmed, वक्तव्यश्च deserves be told this way, यौवराज्यस्थः crowned as prince regent, राज्यस्थम् being in the kingdom, पितरम् father, अनुपालय rule the kingdom (by being obedient to him). 
2::58::22::राजा king Dasaratha, अतिक्रान्तवयाः is advanced in age, एनम् him, मा स्म व्यवरोरुधः do not restrict him, त्वम् you, तस्यैव that king's, आज्ञाप्रवर्तनात् carrying out the commands, कुमारराज्ये as prince regent, जीव live.
2::58::23::भृशम् excessively, अश्रूणि tears, वर्तयन् shedding, माम् addressing me, भूयः more, अब्रवीच्चापि uttered, पुत्रगर्धिनी covetous of her son, मम माता my mother, ते  by you, मातेव as your mother, द्रष्टव्या worthy of being looked after. 
2::58::24::महाराज O king, महायशाः renowned, राजीवताम्राक्षः with red lotuslike eyes, रामः Rama, माम् to me, इत्येवम् thus, ब्रुवन्नेव while saying, भृशम् copious,  अश्रूणि tears, अवर्तयत् shed.
2::58::25::लक्ष्मणस्तु Lakshmana, सुसङ्कृद्धः mighty angry, निश्श्वसन् sighing, वाक्यम् words, अब्रवीत् said, अयम् this, राजपुत्रः king's son, केन by what, अपराधेन offence, विवासितः has been banished?
2::58::26::राज्ञा तु by the king also, कैकेय्याः of Kaikeyi, लघु trash, शासनम् command, आश्रित्य having taken refuge, अकार्यम् a forbidden act, कार्यं वा or a worthy act, कृतम् has been done, येन by which, वयम् we, अभिपीडिताः have been made to suffer.
2::58::27::रामः Rama, लोभकारणकारितम् out of greed (for the kingdom), वरदाननिमित्तं वा or on account of the boons bestowed, प्रव्राजितः यदि if banished, सर्वथा by all means, दुष्कृतम् wicked act, कृतम् has been done.
2::58::28::इदं तावत् this one, ईश्वरस्य कृते for (fear of) God, यथाकामम् this act, कृतम् done, रामस्य Rama's, परित्यागे in abandonment, हेतुम् reason, न उपलक्षये I do not see.
2::58::29::बुद्धिलाघवात् out of lack of intelligence, असमीक्ष्य without (proper) consideration, समारब्धम् commenced, विरुद्धम् contrary (to justice), राघवस्य Rama's, विवासनम् banishment, सङ्क्रोशम् bewailment, जनयिष्यति will produce.
2::58::30::अहम् I, महाराजे in that great king, पितृत्वम् fatherhood, नोपलक्ष्ये I do not see, मम to me, राघवः Rama alone, भ्राता च brother, भर्ताच also protector, बन्धुश्च friend, पिता father.
2::58::31::सर्वलोकप्रियम् beloved to all, सर्वलोकहिते in the welfare of all, रतम् devoted, त्यक्त्वा after deserting, अनेन कर्मणा with this act, त्वा towards you, सर्वलोकः entire world, कथम् how, अनुरज्येत will be pleased?
2::58::32::सर्वप्रजाभिरामम् Delight of all subjects, धार्मिकम् righteous, रामम् to Rama, प्रव्राज्य having used banishment, इमम् this, सर्वलोकम् entire world, विरुध्य antagonizing, राजा king, कथम् how, भविष्यसि will continue to rule?
2::58::33::महाराज O great king, मनस्विनी sensitive lady, जानकी तु Janaki, निश्श्वसन्ती heaving sighs, भूतोपहतचित्तेव like one possessed, विस्मृता स्मिता like one unconcerned with the surroundings and yet smiling, विष्ठिता stood stupefied.
2::58::34::अदृष्टपूर्वव्यसना who had never experienced adversity, यशस्विनी celebrated, राजपुत्री that princess, तेन that, दुःखेन with sorrow, रुदती weeping, माम् to me, किञ्चित् even a little, नैव  अब्रवीत् did not at all say.
2::58::35::सा she, प्रयान्तम् moving, माम् me, उदीक्ष्य having seen, परिशुष्यता with driedup, मुखेन face, भर्तारम् husband, उद्वीक्षमाणा beholding, सहसा suddenly, बाष्पम् tears, मुमोच shed.
2::58::36::तथैव thus, रामः Rama, अश्रुमुखः with his face filled with tears, कृताञ्जलिः with folded hands, लक्ष्मणबाहुपालितः supported by the arms of Lakshmana, स्थितः अभवत् stood, तपस्विनी pitiable, सीता Sita, रुदती weeping, राजरथम् king's chariot, माम् me, निरीक्षते kept gazing.
