2::62::1::क्रुद्धया in anger, सशोकया afflicted with sorrow, राममात्रा by Rama's mother, एवम् in that way, परुषम् harsh, वाक्यम् words, श्रावितः was forced to hear, राजा king, दुःखितः distressed, चिन्तयामास sadly reflected.
2::62::2::सः that, नृपः king, चिन्तयित्वा having thought over, व्याकुलेन्द्रियः with bewildered senses, मुमोह lost consciousness, अथ thereafter, परन्तपः tormentor of enemies, दीर्घेण कालेन  after a long while, संज्ञाम् the senses, आप regained.
2::62::3::सः he, संज्ञाम् senses, उपलभ्यैव after getting back, दीर्घम् deep, उष्णं च hot, निश्श्वसन् sighing, पार्श्वतः by the side, कौसल्याम् Kausalya, दृष्ट्वा having seen, पुनः again, चिन्ताम् anxieties, उपागमत् got into.
2::62::4::चिन्तयमानस्य as he was thinking, तस्य his, पूर्वम् formerly, अनेन by such, शब्दवेधिना Capable of hitting the target by following the sound, अज्ञानात् without knowledge, यत् which, कृतम् has been committed, दुष्कृतम् sinful, कर्म act, प्रत्यभात् flashed back.
2::62::5::तेन शोकेन with that grief, रामशोकेन with the grief of Rama's separation, अमनाः with a broken heart, प्रभुः lord, महाराजः maharaja, द्वाभ्याम् by both, शोकाभ्याम् अपि the sorrows also, अन्वतप्यत started regretting.
2::62::6::शोकाभ्याम् with those two sad incidents, दह्यमानः being afflicted, सः भूपतिः that king (Dasaratha), वेपमानः trembling, आवाङ्मुखः with his head bending downwards, प्रसादार्थम्  to appease, अञ्जलिम् with folded palms, कृत्वा having made, कौशल्याम् to Kausalya, आह said. 
2::62::7::कौशल्ये O Kausalya, त्वाम् you, प्रसादये be merciful, मया by me, अयम् this, अञ्जलिः folded  palms, रचितः set, त्वम् you, परेष्वपि even towards enemies, नित्यम् always, वत्सला is affectionate, अनृशंसा च हि not cruel.
2::62::8::देवि O Devi, धर्मम् righteousness, विमृशमानानाम् pondering over, नारीणाम् for women, गुणवान् virtuous, निर्गुणोपि वा or not virtuous, भर्ता husband, प्रत्यक्षम् visible, दैवतं खलु indeed god to them.
2::62::9::नित्यम् always, धर्मपरा righteousminded one, दृष्टलोकवरावरा knower of both the extremities, सा त्वम् such as you, दुःखितापि although grieved, सुदुःखितम् one who is weighed down with grief, विप्रियम् unpleasant words, वक्तुम् to speak, नार्हसि does not behove you.
2::62::10::कौशल्या Kausalya, दीनस्य of the wretched, राज्ञः king's, करुणम् pitiable, भाषितम् utterances, तत् वाक्यम् those words, श्रुत्वा having heard, प्रणाली water conduit, नवोदकमिव like discharging fresh rainwater, बाष्पम् tears, व्यसृजत् shed.
2::62::11::सा that Kausalya, रुदती crying, पद्ममिव like lotus, राज्ञः king's, अञ्जलिम् folded palms,  मूर्ध्नि on her head, बध्वा setting, त्रस्ता frightened, सम्भ्रमात् out of emotion, त्वरमाणाक्षरम्   stumbling syllables, वचः words, अब्रवीत् said.
2::62::12::देव O lord, प्रसोद be pleased, भूमौ on the earth, निपतिता अस्मि I have fallen down, शिरसा bowing down my head, याचे I beg of you, ते your (by you), याचिता besought, हता अस्मि I have been hit, अहम्  I, त्वया by you, न क्षन्तव्या हि unfit to be pardoned.
2::62::13::वीर O heroic one, या whoever, श्लाघनीयेन by the praiseworthy, धीमता sagacious one, पत्या by the husband, सम्प्रसाद्यते is appeased, सा एषा such this, स्त्री woman, उभयोः both, लोकयोः worlds, न भवति हि does not belong.
2::62::14::धर्मज्ञ O righteous one, धर्मम् righteousness, जानामि I know, त्वाम् you, सत्यवादिनम् truthful, जाने know, तु but, पुत्रशोकार्तया by one afflicted with grief over a son, मया by me, तत् that, किमपि somewhat improper, भाषितम् spoken.
2::62::15::शोकः grief, धैर्यम् patience, नाशयते destroys, शोकः grief, श्रुतम् knowledge of the scriptures, नाशयते destroys, शोकः grief, सर्वम् everything, नाशयते destroys, शोकसमः equal to grief, रिपुः enemy, नास्ति not there.
2::62::16::रिपुहस्तः from the enemy's hand, आपतितः suddenly fallen, प्रहारः blow, सोढुम् to endure, शक्यः possible, शोकः grief, सुसूक्ष्मोऽपि however slight, सोढुम् to endure, न शक्यते not possible.
2::62::17::वीर O heroic one, धर्मज्ञाः men wellversed in ethics, श्रुतिमन्तः learned men, छिन्नधर्मार्थसंशयाः  those free from doubts about dharma and artha, यतयः अपि even ascetics,  शोकसम्मूढचेतसः with their senses overwhelmed with grief, मुह्यन्ति are deluded.
2::62::18::वनवासाय for exile in the forest, रामस्य Rama's, पञ्चरात्रः five nights, अद्य today, गण्यते has been counted, यः such a period, शोकहतहर्षायाः whose joy has been destroyed by sorrow, मम to me, पञ्चवर्षोपमः equal to five years.
2::62::19::तम् Rama, चिन्तयमानायाः while thinking of, हृदि in my heart, अयम् this, शोकः sadness, नदीनाम् by river waters, वेगेन by speed, महत् great, समुद्रसलिलमिव like seawaters, वर्धते is increasing. 
2::62::20::कौशल्यायाः of Kausalya, एवम् in that manner, शुभम् auspicious, वचः words, कथयन्त्याः speaking, सूर्यः the Sun, मन्दरश्मिः आभूत् faded rays, रजनी च night, अभ्यवर्तत had set in.
2::62::21::देव्या by the queen, कौशल्यया by Kausalya, तथा like that, प्रसादितः consoled, नृपः king, शोकेन by sorrow, समाक्रान्तः च was overcome with grief, निद्रायाः sleep, वशम् influence of, एयिवान्  obtained.
