2::21::1::लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, दीनः miserable, तथा thus, विलपन्तीम् lamenting, राममातरम् Rama's mother, तां कौशल्याम् to that Kausalya, तत्कालसदृशम् befitting to the occasion, वचः words, उवाच said. 
2::21::2::आर्ये O venerable one, राघवः Rama, स्त्रियाः a woman's, वाक्यवशं गतः yielding to the words, राज्यश्रियम् the welfare of the kingdom, त्यक्त्वा renouncing, वनम् to the forest, गच्छेत् (इति) यत् should go , एतत् all this, ममापि to me also, न रोचते is not pleasing.
2::21::3::विपरीतश्च man of perverse nature, वृद्धश्च aged also, विषयैः by carnal pleasures, प्रधर्षितः च  struck, समन्मथः ruled by passion, नृपः king, चोद्यमानः incited by (Kaikeyi), किमिव whatever words, न ब्रूयात् not speak.
2::21::4::राघवः Rama, येन for which, राष्ट्रात् from the kingdom, वनवासाय to dwell in the forest, निर्वास्यते is  banished, तथाविधम् such, अस्य his, अपराधं offence, न पश्यामि do not see, दोषम् अपि fault also, न not.
2::21::5::स्वमित्रोऽपि even an adversary, निरस्तोऽपि or the defeated, यः नरः any man, परोक्षमपि in his absence also, अस्य his, दोषम् fault, उदाहरेत् can cite, तम् him, अहम् I, लोके in this  world, न पश्यामि do not find.
2::21::6::धर्मम् righteousness, अवेक्षमाणः without caring, कः who, देवकल्पम् equal to god, ऋजुम्  upright, दान्तम् with subdued passions, रिपूणामपि even for his enemies, वत्सलम् a loved man, पुत्रम् son, अकारणात् without any cause, त्यजेत् will abandon.
2::21::7::राजवृत्तम् leading the life of a king, अनुस्मरन् remembering, कः पुत्रः which son, पुनः again, बाल्यम् childhood, उपेयुषः regained, राज्ञः king's, तत् इदं वचनम् that such words, हृदये in the heart, कुर्यात् will accept? 
2::21::8::कश्चित् any one, नरः man, इमम् अर्थम् this information, यावदेव until, न जानाति does not come to know, तावदेव before that period, मया साधे with my assistance, शासनम् authority (over the kingdom ), आत्मस्थम् under your control, कुरु do (assume).
2::21::9::राघव O Rama, पार्श्वे by your side, स धनुषा with bow, मया by me, गुप्तस्य protected, कृतान्तस्येव like Yama, (god of death), तिष्ठतः (yourself) standing, अधिकम् excess, कर्तुं to challenge, कः who, समर्थः is able?
2::21::10::मनुजर्षभ O best among men, विप्रिये against you, स्थास्यति यदि if any one stands up, इमाम् this, कृत्स्नाम् entire, अयोध्याम् Ayodhya, तीक्ष्णैः with sharp, शरैः arrows, निर्मनुष्याम्  depopulate, करिष्यामि I shall do.
2::21::11::अथ even so, भरतस्य Bharata's, पक्ष्यो वा or any supporter, यो वा or any one, अस्य his, हितम्  welfare, इच्छति seeking, एतान् सर्वान् all those, वधिष्यामि I shall slay, मृदुः a soft (person), परिभूयते हि is treated with disgrace indeed.
2::21::12::कैकेय्या by Kaikeyi, प्रोत्साहितः instigated, सः that, दुष्टः vicious, नः पिता our father, अमित्रभूतः यदि becomes enemy, निस्सङ्गं without caring for any relationship, अयम् I will, बध्यताम् shall be imprisoned, वध्यतामपि also shall be slain.
2::21::13::अवलिप्तस्य filled with haughtiness, कार्याकार्यम् acts good and bad, अजानतः  of one who does not know, उत्पथम् unrighteous path, प्रतिपन्नस्य of one who has resorted to, गुरोरपि even of a preceptor, शासनम् discipline, कार्यम् duty, भवति becomes. 
2::21::14::पुरुषर्षभ O best of men, तव your, स्थितम् belongings, इदम् this, राज्यम् kingdom, एषः he, किम् what, बलम् power, हेतुं वा or reason, आश्रित्य resorting to, कैकेय्यै to Kaikeyi, दातुम् to confer, इच्छति wishes.
2::21::15::अरिशासन O chastiser of foes, त्वया चैव with you, मया चैव with me, अनुत्तमम् undesirable, वैरम् hostility, कृत्वा having created, अस्य for him, भरताय to Bharata, श्रियम् kingdom, दातुम् to bestow, का शक्तिः what strength he has?
2::21::16::देवि mother, तत्त्वत: truly, भावेन from the bottom of my heart, भ्रातरम् my brother, अनुरक्तः अस्मि I am loyal, सत्येन truthfully, धनुषा चैव with bow also, दत्तेन on charity, इष्टेन on sacrifice, ते to you, शपे I swear.
2::21::17::देवि O mother, रामः Rama, दीप्तम् blazing, अग्निम् fire, अरण्यं वा or to the forest, प्रवेक्ष्यति यदि if  he enters, पूर्वम् prior, माम् me, तत्र there, प्रविष्टम् one who entered, त्वम् you, अवधारय know.
2::21::18::उदितः arisen, सूर्यः Sun, तम इव like darkness, वीर्यात् with my valour, ते दुःखम् your sorrow, हरामि shall take away, देवी mother, मे वीर्यम् my valour, पश्यतु one shall see, राघवश्चैव Rama also, पश्यतु shall see.
2::21::19::महात्मनः of the magnanimous, लक्ष्मणस्य Lakshmana's, एतत् वचनम् these words, श्रुत्वा having heard, कौशल्या Kausalya, रुदन्ती weeping, शोकलालसा depressed with sorrow, रामम्   to Rama, उवाच said.
2::21::20::पुत्र O son, ते your, भ्रातुः brother's, लक्ष्मणस्य of Lakshmana, वदतः saying, त्वया by you, श्रुतम्  has been heard, रोचते यदि if it pleases (you), अत्र in this matter, अनन्तरम् later, यत् what, कार्यम् is to be done, कुरूष्व you may do it.
2::21::21::मम my, सपत्न्या by (my) cowife (Kaikeyi), भाषितम् spoken, अधर्म्यम् unrighteous, वचः words, श्रुत्वा having heard, शोकसन्तप्ताम् stricken with grief, माम् me, विहाय leaving, इतः from here, गन्तुम् to go, नार्हसि does not behove you.
2::21::22::धर्मज्ञ O knower of duties, धर्मिष्ठः pious, धर्मम् righteousness, चरितुम् to follow, इच्छसि यदि if you wish, त्वम् you, इहस्थः by staying here, माम् me, शुश्रूष serve, अनुत्तमम् best, धर्मम् of virutes, चर follow.
2::21::23::पुत्र O son, काश्यपः Kasyapa, जननीम् his mother, शुश्रूषुः by serving, नियतः with selfdiscipline, स्वगृहे in his own home, वसन् while dwelling, परेण with the highest, तपसा with penance, युक्तः engaged in, त्रिदिवम् heaven, गतः went.
2::21::24::राजा king, गौरवेण out of reverence, ते to you, यथैव how, पूज्यः is worthy of homage, अहम् I, तथा हि in the same manner, अहम् I, त्वाम् to you, नानुजानामि will not permit, इतः from here, वनम् to the forest, न गन्तव्यम् shall not go.
2::21::25::त्वद्वियोगात् by being separated from you, मे for me, जीवितेन with life, सुखेन वा or with happiness, कार्यम् any purpose, न not, त्वया सह along with you, मम to me, तृणानाम् of grass, भक्षणम् अपि feeding also, श्रेयः is preferable.
2::21::26::शोकलालसाम् overtaken by sorrow, माम् me, त्यक्त्वा after leaving, त्वम् you, वनम् to the forest, यास्यसि यदि if you depart, अहम् I, इह here, प्रायम् असिष्ये I shall seek death by fasting, जीवितुम् to live, न शक्ष्यामि हि I am not able.
2::21::27::ततः after that, पुत्र O son, त्वम् you, सरितां पतिः lord of all rivers, समुद्रः ocean, अधर्मात्  through unrighteous conduct, ब्रह्महत्यामिव like slaying a brahmin, लोकविश्रुतम् renowned  in the world, निरयम् hell, प्राप्स्यसे will attain.
2::21::28::ततः thereafter, धर्मात्मा virtuous, रामः Rama, दीनाम् miserable lady, तथा in that way, विलपन्तीम् lamenting, जननीम् to his mother, कौशल्याम् to Kausalya, धर्मसंहितम् consistent with righteousness, वचनम् words, उवाच said.
2::21::29::पितुः father's, वाक्यम् words (order), समतिक्रमितुम् to transgress, मम for me, शक्तिः power, नास्ति is not there, अहम् I, शिरसा bowing my head, प्रसादये I am propitiating, वनम् to forest, गन्तुम् to depart, इच्छामि wishing.
2::21::30::ऋषिणा by the sage, व्रतचारिणा by a man observing the vows, धर्मम् righteousness, जानता by the knower, विपश्चिता by a learned man, अपि even, कण्डुना by Kandu, पितुः father's, वाक्यम् command, कुर्वता carrying out, गौ: cow, हता slew.
2::21::31::पूर्वम् earlier, अस्माकम् in our, कुले च race, पितुः of father, सगरस्य Sagara's, आज्ञया by command, भूमिम् earth, खनद्भि: by those excavating, सागरैः by the sons of Sagara, सुमहान् very great (fearful), वधः slaughter, आवाप्तः was met with.
2::21::32::पितुः father's, वचनकारिणा in obedience to the words, जामदग्न्येन by the son of Jamadagni, रामेण by Parasurama, जननी his mother, रेणुका Renuka, स्वयम् himself, अरण्ये in the forest, परशुना by an axe, कृत्ता was severed.
2::21::33::देवि O Devi, एतैः by these, देवसमैः by godlike people, बहुभिः many, अन्यैश्च by others also, पितुः father's, वचनम् words, अक्लीबम् fruitful, कृतम् was made, पितुः father's, हितम् wish, करिष्यामि I will do.
2::21::34::देवि O Devi, मया by me, एकेन by me alone, एतत् this, पितृशासनम् father's command, न क्रियते has not been obeyed, मया by me, ये all those, तव to you, कीर्तिताः have been mentioned, एतैरपि even by them, कृतम् it has been done.
2::21::35::अहम् I, प्रतिकूलम् contrary to the old practice, अपूर्वम् anything new, धर्मम् practice, ते to you, न प्रवर्तये I am not advancing, पूर्वैः by ancestors, अभिप्रेतः acceptable, गतः followed by them, अयम् this, मार्गः path, अनुगम्यते is being followed.
2::21::36::भुवि in this world, कार्यम् duty, तत् एतत् that this(compliance with the command), मया by me, अन्यथा in any other manner, न क्रियते will not be done, पितुः father's, वचनम् orders, कुर्वन् while carrying out, कश्चित् any one, न हीयते नाम will not perish.
2::21::37::वाक्यविदाम् of the knowers of speech, श्रेष्ठः best man, सर्वधनुष्मताम् among all archers,  श्रेष्ठः best man, तां जननीम् his mother, एवम् thus, उक्त्वा having spoken, पुनः again, लक्ष्मणम् to Lakshmana, अब्रवीत् spoke.
2::21::38::लक्ष्मण O Lakshmana, तव your, मयि in me, अनुत्तमम् exceedingly great, स्नेहम् affection, विक्रमं चैव also valour, सत्त्वं च also strength, सुदुरासदम् unassailable, तेजश्च energy, जानामि I know.
2::21::39::शुभलक्षण O one of auspicious qualities (Lakshmana), सत्यस्य च of truth, शमस्य च of selfrestraint, अभिप्रायम् the meaning, अविज्ञाय without realising, मम मातुः my mother's, अतुलम् incomparable, महत् दुःखम् great grief.
2::21::40::धर्मः righteousness, लोके in this world, परमो हि is supreme, धर्मे in righteousness, सत्यम्  truth, प्रतिष्ठितम् is established, एतत् this, उत्तमम् excellent, पितुः father's, वचनं च words, धर्मसंश्रितम् is supported by righteousness.
2::21::41::वीर O hero, पितुः of father, मातुर्वा or of mother, ब्राह्मणस्य वा or of brahmins, संश्रुत्य having promised, धर्मम् righteouness, आश्रित्य having taken recourse, तिष्ठता by one who abides in, वाक्यम् words, वृथा in vain, न कर्तव्यम् is not to be done.
2::21::42::वीर O warrior, सः अहम् such me, पितुः father's, नियोगम् command, अतिवर्तितुम् to transgress, न शक्ष्यामि I am not competent, पितुः father's, वचनात् from the words, अहम् I, कैकेय्या by Kaikeyi, प्रचोदितः हि urged.
2::21::43::तत् for that reason, अनार्याम् ignoble, क्षत्रधर्माश्रिताम् resorting to the duty of a kshatriya, मतिम् intellect, विसृज you may give up, धर्मम् righteousness, आश्रय adopt, तैक्ष्ण्यम् violence, मा do not follow, मद्बुद्धिः my thought, अनुगम्यताम् be followed.
2::21::44::लक्ष्मणाग्रजः elder brother of Lakshmana, Rama, तम् that, भ्रातरम् his brother, सौहार्दात् affectionately, एवम् in this way, उत्त्वा having spoken, प्राञ्जलिः with folded hands, शिरसा with head, नतः down, भूयः again, कौशल्याम् to Kausalya, उवाच said.
2::21::45::देवि O Devi, इतः from here, वनम् to the forest, गमिष्यन्तम् one who has decided to go, अनुमन्यस्व you may permit, मम me, प्राणैः with life, शापिता असि you are sworn, मे to me, स्वस्त्ययनानि all ceremonial means of securing prosperity, कुरु perform.
2::21::46::पुरा in the past, ययातिः Yayati, राजर्षिः rajarshi, दिवम् heaven, हित्वा having left,  पुनः again, दिवम् इव like heaven, अहम् I, तीर्ण प्रतिज्ञः having fulfilled my vow, वनात् from the forest, पुनः again, पुरीम् to the city (of Ayodhya), एष्यामि shall return.
2::21::47::मात O mother, शोकः sorrow, हृदये in the heart, साधु prudently, सन्धार्यताम् be subdued, मा शुचः do not grieve, पितुः father's, वचः words, कृत्वा having fulfilled, वनवासात् from exile, पुनः again, इह here, एष्यामि will come back.
2::21::48::त्वया by you, मया च by me, वैदेह्या by Sita, लक्ष्मणेन by Lakshmana, सुमित्रया by Sumitra, पितुः  father's, नियोगे by the orders, स्थातव्यम् we shall abide, एषः this alone, सनातनः eternal, धर्मः law.
2::21::49::अम्ब O mother, सम्भारान् articles (for consecration), संहृत्य after withdrawing, दुःखम् sorrow, हृदि in the heart, निगृह्य च also after subduing, वनवासकृता relating to my dwelling in the forest, धर्म्या conforming to duty, मम बुद्धि: my thinking, अनुवर्त्यताम् follow.
2::21::50::माता mother, देवी Devi (Kausalya), तस्य that Rama's, सुधर्म्यम् conforming to virtue, अव्यग्रम्   unruffled, अविक्लबं च also without getting distressed, एतत् all this, वचः words, निशम्य having heard, मृतेव like a dead person, संज्ञाम् consciousness, प्रतिलभ्य having regained, रामम् Rama, समीक्ष्य having looked at intently, पुनः again, इति thus, उवाच said.
2::21::51::पुत्र O my son, स्वधर्मेण by virtue of one's own duty, सुहृत्तया च out of affection, ते your, पिता father, यथैव as he is to you, तथा like that, अहम् I, गुरुः preceptor, त्वा you, न अनुजानामि do not permit, सुदुःखिताम् highly distressed, माम् me, विहाय leaving, एवम् in this manner, गन्तुम् to go, नार्हसि does not behove you.
2::21::52::त्वया विना without you, मे to me, इह here, जीवितेन with life, किम् what is the purpose, लोकेन with the other world, स्वधया with the oblations (offered to manes), अमृतेन वा or with nectar or immortality available to the gods, किम् what use, मम for me, इह here, कृत्स्नात् entire, जीवलोकात् अपि even more than the world of human beings, मुहूर्तम् even for a moment, तव your, सन्निधानम् presence, श्रेयः more desirable.
2::21::53::रामः Rama, एवम् in this way, करुणम् pitiful, जनन्याः mother's, विलापम् lamentation, निशम्य having heard, नरैः by men, उल्काभिः by meteors (fireworks), अपोह्यमानः being prevented, अध्वानम् the way, अनुप्रविष्टः entered, महागजः इव like a mighty elephant, भूयः still more, प्रजज्वाल was burning (within). 
2::21::54::धर्मे in righteousness, स्थितः abiding, सः that Rama, विसंज्ञकल्पाम् like one who has fallen into a swoon, मातरं चैव to his mother also, अभिप्रतप्तम् tormented with suffering, सौमित्रिम् to Lakshmana, तत्र at that time, यथा in such a way, वक्तुम् to speak, स एव he alone, अर्हति is competent (in that way), धर्म्यम् endowed with  righteousness, वाक्यम् words, उवाच said.
2::21::55::लक्ष्मण O Lakshmana, अहम् I, नित्यमेव always, ते your, भक्तिं च also devotion, पराक्रमं च valour too, जानामि know, तु but, मम my, अभिप्रायम् intention, असन्निरीक्ष्य without probing, मात्रा सह along with my mother, माम् me, सुदुःखम् severe pain, अभ्यर्दसि you are tormenting.
2::21::56::तात O dear one, लोके in this world, धर्मफलोदयेषु obtaining the fruits of righteousness, धर्मार्थकामाः righteousness, wealth and objects of desire, समीक्षिताः are considered, वश्या obedient, अभिमता beloved, सुपुत्रा having good sons, भार्येव like a wife, तत्र in that  (righteousness), ते सर्वे all these (dharma, artha and kama), स्युः will remain, मे to me, असंशयम् there is no doubt.
2::21::57::यस्मिन् in whichever man, सर्वे all these (three), असन्निविष्टाः स्युः are not combined, यतः by which, धर्मः righteousness, स्यात् is present, तत् that one, उपक्रमेत should be performed, लोके in the world, अर्थपरः a seeker of wealth, द्वेष्यः is abhorred, भवति हि happens, कामात्मतापि subjecting to fulfilment of desires also, न प्रशस्ता खलु is not  admired (by the wise).
2::21::58::गुरुश्च the precepter, राजा च the king also, वृद्धः च an old man, पिता च also father, क्रोधात् due to anger, प्रहर्षात् due to joy, यदि वा or, कामात् अपि even due to passion, यत् such, कार्यम् act, व्यादिशेत् commands, तत् that one, धर्मम् as rightful duty, अवेक्ष्य having seen, अनृशंसवृत्तिः no tendency to cruelty, कः who, न कुर्यात् will not do.
2::21::59::सः that kind of me, पितुः father's, सकलाम् completely, इमां प्रतिज्ञाम् this promise, यथावत् as it is, अकर्तुम् not to execute, न शक्नोमि वै for sooth I am not competent, तात O my dear, सः he, नियोगे in command, आवयोः for both of us, गुरुः हि is preceptor, देव्याश्च of mother also, सः he,  भर्ता husband, सः he, गतिः is refuge, धर्मः virtue.
2::21::60::धर्मराजे when the king of righteousness, तस्मिन् himself, जीवति while he is living, विशेषतः specially, स्वे his own, पथि in the path, वर्तमाने while he is moving, देवी mother Kausalya, अन्या other, विधवा नारीव like a widow, मया सार्धम् along with me, कथं स्वित्  how, इतः from here, अपगच्छेत् shall come away.
2::21::61::देवि O mother, सा such you, वनम् to the forest, व्रजन्तम् departing, मा me, अनुमन्यस्व allow, सत्येन by the strength of truth, ययातिः Yayati, यथा just like, पुनः again, समाप्ते after completion of the term, यथा as, पुनः again, अव्रजेयम् I shall come back, स्वस्त्ययनानि ceremonies causing prosperity, कुरुष्व you may perform.
2::21::62::केवलराज्यकारणात् only for the sake of the kingdom, अहम् I, महोदयम् great, यशः glory, पृष्ठतः कर्तुम् to push it back, न अलम् must not, देवि O Mother, अदीर्घकाले in a short duration, जीविते in life, अद्य now, अवराम् insignificant, महीम् earth, अधर्मतः unrighteously, न वृणे will not choose.
2::21::63::सः that, नरवृषभः excellent among men, पराक्रमात् courageously, दण्डकान् to Dandaka forest, जिगमिषुरेव wishes to go to, मातरम् to mother, प्रसादयन् while pacifying, अथ thereafter, अनुजम् to brother, भृशम् exceedingly, दर्शनम् good intention, अनुशास्य ह having disciplined (instructed), हृदि in his heart, तां जननीम् his mother, प्रदक्षिणं चकार circumambulated.
