2::70::1::While Bharata was relating his dream, the mounted messengers (from Ayodhya) with their weary horses entered the lovely city of Rajagriha  surrounded by an impassable moat. There they met the king of Kekaya country and his son, Yuddhajit and were received with honour. Touching the feet of the king with reverence, they  said to Bharata:
2::70::2::While Bharata was relating his dream, the mounted messengers (from Ayodhya) with their weary horses entered the lovely city of Rajagriha  surrounded by an impassable moat. There they met the king of Kekaya country and his son, Yuddhajit and were received with honour. Touching the feet of the king with reverence, they  said to Bharata:
2::70::3::The family priest (Vasistha) and all the counsellors have enquired about your welfare. You must return immediately. There is an urgent matter to be attended by you.
2::70::4::Oh largeeyed one (Bharata) you are asked to take these excellent raiments and precious ornaments and bestow them on your maternal uncle (said the messengers).
2::70::5::O prince these gifts worth twenty crore are intended for the king and the rest of the gifts worth ten crore for your maternal uncle.
2::70::6:: Affectionate towards his relatives and friends, Bharata received all those gifts and in return honoured those messengers with things they liked, asking them:
2::70::7::I hope my father, Dasaratha is doing well and revered Rama and Lakshmana are in good health
2::70::8:: (I hope) Kausalya mother of the sagacious Rama the venerable lady devoted to righteousness one who knows the ways of righteousness and observes the prescribed code of conduct, is keeping sound  health.
2::70::9::I hope my mother Sumitra (the middle one) who is familiar with the ways of righteousness, the mother of valiant Lakshmana and Satrughna, is enjoying good health. 
2::70::10:: And what about my mother Kaikeyi, ever intent on her own wellbeing, wrathful, irascible and proud of her intelligence? Is she maintaining sound health? 
2::70::11::Having listened to the words of that magnanimous Bharata, those messengers addressed him  gracefully with these words.
2::70::12::O tiger among men (Bharata) those of whose welfare you are enquiring are all doing well. May the goddess of wealth and prosperity await you and let your chariot be yoked. 
2::70::13::Having thus been addressed, Bharata said to the messengers. Let me seek the permission of the great king of Kekaya to leave and say goodbye, informing him that the messengers are hastening me up.
2::70::14:: Having addressed the messengers who were pressing him to leave (for Ayodhya) Bharata said to his maternal grandfather: 
2::70::15::O king, urged by these messengers I wish to go to my father. I shall come back again (from Ayodhya) whenever you  remember me.
2::70::16::Then the  king of Kekaya, the maternal grandfather of Bharata, having heard the words of the scion of the Raghu dynasty (Bharata), kissed him on his forehead and spoke these auspicious words:
2::70::17::You may go, my child I permit you to leave. Kaikeyi has a worthy son in you. O slayer of enemies convey my best wishes to your mother and father.
2::70::18::My child, convey my best wishes, too, to your family priest Vasistha and other illustrious brahmins and also to those two great bowmen (Rama and Lakshmana).  
2::70::19::The king of Kekaya felicitated Bharata, out of affection and bestowed on him wellbred elephants, manycoloured blankets, antelope skins and riches.
2::70::20::King of Kekaya generously gave to the son of Kaikeyi (Bharata) in his honour two thousand gold coins and  sixteen hundred horses.
2::70::21:: Similarly his maternal uncle Ashwapati quickly presented him amenable, trustworthy and virtuous counsellors as companions on his return journey.
2::70::22::His maternal uncle gave him the wealth of goodlooking elephants born in Iravata and Indrasira mountains and swiftmoving and welltrained asses which can be yoked easily. He gave riches too.
2::70::23:: He also gave him a gift of wellraised dogs of the inner apartment hugebodied with the strength and courage of tigers who used their fangs as weapons.
2::70::24::All the wealth given by the king of Kekaya did not delight Bharata, son of Kaikeyi who was in a hurry to depart for Ayodhya.
2::70::25::Then his heart was filled with extreme anxiety due to the haste of the messengers to depart and also due to the dream he had.
2::70::26::Prosperous Bharata on leaving his residence, passed through incomparable royal highway thronged with men, elephants and horses. 
2::70::27::Then the nobleminded, prosperous Bharata, on leaving the  highway, saw  the inner apartment of the king which he entered unhindered.
2::70::28::Thus having taken leave of his maternal grandfather and uncle Yuddhajit, Bharata accompanied by Satrughna boarded the chariot and went along.
2::70::29:: And the servants harnessing more than a hundred chariots of wellrounded wheels and also camels, oxen and horses followed Bharata who started off.        
2::70::30:: Under the protection of the army, the illustrious Bharata who was devoid of enemies, accompanied by ministers who were comparable to him and Satrughna, departed from his venerable grandfather's house like a siddha leaving the regions of Indra.      इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अयोध्याकाण्डे सप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventieth sarga in Ayodhyakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
