4::35::1::While Lakshmana, the son of Sumitra, was glowing like fire with his brilliance, thus spoke the moonfaced Tara:  
4::35::2::'O Lakshmana you, in particular, should not speak to the king of vanaras in that manner. He does not deserve to hear from your mouth words which are harsh.
4::35::3::'O hero Sugriva, king of monkeys, is not ungrateful or deceitful, He is neither crooked nor false.
4::35::4::'O hero this warrior Sugriva has not forgotten the help rendered by Rama in combat which was difficult (to win).
4::35::5::'O scorcher of enemies it is by Rama's grace that Sugriva has attained fame, the kingdom of monkeys and Ruma and me.
4::35::6::'Sleep did not come to him in deep distress in the past, and now that great happiness has come, he does not realize that it is time to act (search for Sita). He behaves like sage Viswamitra.
4::35::7::'O Lakshmana great sage Visvamitra was in union with an apsara Gritachi for ten years and felt it was just one day indeed
4::35::8::'If the brilliant and the most distinguished of those who knew the value of time did not realise the passing of time, what can be said of an ordinary person?
4::35::9::'O Lakshmana you should pardon him since he is not yet satisfied, though tired, with the struggle for the fulfilment of his sensual pleasures.
4::35::10::'O dear Lakshmana not knowing the true intention of Sugriva, it is not proper for you to be rashly angry like an ordinary man.
4::35::11::'O bull among men men with right vision like you do not become angry instantly without right thinking.
4::35::12::'O Lakshmana, knower of dharma, give up your agitation arising out of great anger. Be composed for the sake of Sugriva.
4::35::13::'I feel Sugriva should (is prepared to) renounce the monkeykingdom, wealth, grains and other treasures and even Ruma and me for the pleasure of Rama. 
4::35::14::'Killing Ravana in war, Sugriva will restore Sita soon to Rama.Rama will join Sita like Moon joins Rohini.
4::35::15::'The number of demons in Lanka is reported to be a hundred thousand crore, three lakh, ninetynine thousand and six hundred. (Note: Indian tradition has numbers up to eighteen digits. One hundred thousand crores is equal to a 'mahapadma' which has thirteen digits. The number described here is 1000000399600.)
4::35::16::'It is not possible to kill Ravana who has stolen Sita without killing those unassailable demons who can assume any form at their will.
4::35::17::'O Lakshmana moreover it is not possible for Sugriva alone to kill the wicked Ravana without the help of the monkeys.
4::35::18::Vali, the wellinformed lord of the monkeys, has given an account of the demons. The source of the account is not known to me.Therefore I am speaking from what I have heard.
4::35::19::'Monkey chiefs have been sent to bring multitudes of monkey leaders to help you in the battle.
4::35::20::'Sugriva is awaiting the arrival of the powerful and strong vanaras without whose help he cannot accomplish Rama's task.Therefore he has not yet started (the search).  
4::35::21::'O Lakshmana since Sugriva has already promulgated an ordinance to all the mighty vanaras, they should be all arriving by now.
4::35::22::
4::35::23::'Looking at your angry countenance with bloodred eyes, the wives of  the foremost of monkeys are frightened by the possibility of similar danger of the past (of Vali's death) and do not find peace of mind.'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे पञ्चत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyfifth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
