4::32::1::On hearing about Lakshmana's anger from Angada, prudent Sugriva consulted his counsellors.
4::32::2::Sugriva, being skilled in secret assessment of matters, considering the merits and demerits, spoke to his council of ministers capable of intelligent counselling: 
4::32::3::'Indeed I have not uttered any harsh word or done anything wrong. I, therefore, wonder why Rama's brother, Lakshmana is angry with me? 
4::32::4::'Some enemies, who are always searching for imaginary faults of mine might have poisoned Lakshmana's ears.
4::32::5::'In the meanwhile, (right now) all of you should think quietly and try to know the reason (for Lakshmana's anger), using your intellect and expertise logically and decide( the course of action). 
4::32::6::'I have no fear either from Lakshmana or from Rama. However, when a friend is enraged without reason, it creates misgivings.
4::32::7::'It is easy to earn a friend but keeping the friendship sustained is difficult. Due to fickleness of mind friendship gets broken even on flimsy grounds.
4::32::8::'Therefore, I am apprehensive of Rama. I am not able to repay the help he has rendered to me'.
4::32::9::When Sugriva spoke thus, Hanuman the great monkey, submitted in the presnce of the monkeyministers, applying his own logic:
4::32::10::'It is not at all a matter of surprise, O king of vanara clan, that you forgot the good service rendered to you with utmost sense of friendship.
4::32::11::'To remove your fear and to please you, the great hero Rama has killed Vali, an equal to Indra in valour.
4::32::12::'Rama's anger is purely out of love for you. He has sent Lakshmana, a bestower of prosperity to you. There is no doubt about it.
4::32::13::'You knows best the passage of time (changing seasons). But you are not aware out of inattention that the auspicious autumn has set in, making the garden lush green with blossoms of Saptachada flowers.
4::32::14::'The sky from which the dark clouds have completely disappeared is illumined with planets and stars. The rivers and tanks as well as all directions are pleasant.
4::32::15::'O chief of monkeys it is time for military expeditions. Since you are intoxicated you are not aware of this, Lakshmana has come here evidently for this.
4::32::16:: 'The message sent by a man who is in distress, and is deprived of his wife should be accepted even if they are harsh since he is a great self (who has rendered you help). 
4::32::17::'In these circumstances the best way is seeking apology from Lakshmana with folded hands. I do not see any way other than this.
4::32::18::'The counsellors and ministers appointed by a king should certainly give good advice, without fear. This I tell you since I have faith in my words.
4::32::19::
4::32::20::'He who deserves propitiation, should not be offended, more so by a  grateful man, remembering the  help received by him earlier.
4::32::21:: 'O king bow down your head along with your son, friends and relations and honour the oath just as a wife subordinates to the will of the husband. Stand by obediently.
4::32::22::'O king of monkeys It is not right for you to overlook the commands of Rama or Lakshmana even in mind. You know the superhuman virtues of Rama, particularly his valour. The two brothers are like Indra (and Upendra) in valour and might.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे द्वात्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtysecond sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
