4::37::1::महात्मना great self, लक्ष्मणेन by Lakshmana, एवम् in that manner, उक्त having said, सुग्रीवः Sugriva, पार्श्वे by his side, स्थितम् stood, हनूमन्तम् to Hanuman, इदं this, सचिवं minister,  अब्रवीत् said.
4::37::2::महेन्द्रहिमवद्विन्ध्यकैलासशिखरेषु च on the peaks of Mahendra, Himavan, Vindhya and Kailasa mountains, पाण्डुशिखरे on the white peak, मन्दरे of Mandara, पञ्चशैलेषु on the five mountains, ये who, स्थिताः ever residing, समुद्रान्ते on the shores of the sea, सर्वत: all over, भ्राजमानेषु on the lustrous, तरुणादित्यवर्णेषु colour of the rising Sun, पर्वतेषु on mountains, पश्चिमायाम् western, दिशि direction, ये those, सन्ध्याभ्रसन्निभे like the clouds of the setting Sun, आदित्यभवने the mountain where the Sun rises, गिरौ चैव even mountains, भीमं fierce, हरिपुङ्गवाः best of monkeys, पद्म तालवनम् in the garden of Padmatala, संश्रिताः staying, अञ्जने पर्वते on the Anjani mountain, अञ्जनाम्बुदसङ्काशाः resembling black clouds, कुञ्जरेन्द्रप्रतिमौजसः strong as best elephants, ये प्लवङ्गमाः the monkeys, वसन्ति dwelling, मनश्शिलागुहावासाः  residing at Manassilva (a red pigment of arsenic) mountain caves, कनकप्रभाः shining like gold in complexion, वानराः monkeys, मेरुपार्श्वगताश्चैव and those who have gone to Mount Meru, ये those, धूम्रगिरिम् at  Dhumra mountain, श्रिताः staying, महारुणे on Maharuna, पर्वते on the mountain, मैरेयं मधु liquor of Maireya, पिबन्तः drinking, भीमवेगाः of terrific speed, ये those, तरुणादित्यवर्णाः of the colour of the rising Sun, प्लवङ्गमाः monkeys, सुरम्येषु on beautiful spots, सुगन्धिषु of the fragrant, महत्सु on the great, वनेषु च and in the forests, तापसानां च रम्येषु at the delightful hermitages of ascetics, समन्ततः all over, वनान्तेषु allover the forest, पृथिव्याम् on the earth, तां स्तान् respective ones, सर्ववानरान् all the monkeys, सामदानादिभिः using all means (sama and dana), सवै: by all, आशुप्रेषय send for, वानरान् the monkeys, क्षिप्रम् at once, त्वम् you, आनय bring.
4::37::3::मया by me, दूताः messengers, महाजवाः swift, ये those, प्रथमम् earlier, प्रेषिताः are sent forth, त्वरणार्थम् to hasten, त्वम् you, भूयः again, आपरान् others, हरीन् monkeys, सम्प्रेषय send.
4::37::4::ये those, वानराः monkeys, कामेषु in carnal pleasures, प्रसक्ताश्च engaged in, दीर्घसूत्राश्च slow workers, सर्वान् all, तां them, मम शासनात् on my command, शीघ्रम् at once, इह here, आनयस्व  bring.
4::37::5::ये those, मम my, आज्ञया by my orders, दशभिः in ten days, अहोभिः by days, नागच्छन्ति are not coming, राजशासनदूषकाः  disobeying king's order, ते they, दुरात्मानः evilminded ones, हन्तव्याः to be killed.
4::37::6::मम my, दिशः all directions, मम my, मते स्थिताः obedient to me, कपिसिंहानाम् of lion like monkeys, शतानि hundred, सहस्राणां thousand, कोट्यश्च crores, मम my, शासनात् by command, प्रयान्तु let them go.
4::37::7::मेघपर्वतसङ्काशाः those comparable to clouds and mountains, घोररूपाः fierce in appearance, कपिश्रेष्ठाः best of monkeys, अम्बरम् sky, छाहोदयन्त इव as if covering, मच्छासनात् by my command, इतः from here, यान्तु will go.
4::37::8::गतिज्ञाः those who know the locations, ते they, सर्ववानराः all vanaras, त्वरिताः quickly, गतिं ज्ञात्वा knowing their movements, पृथिव्याम् on the earth, सर्वान् all, हरीन् monkeys, मम my, शासनात् command, आनयन्तु bring.
4::37::9::वायुसुतः son of Windgod, तस्य वानरराजस्य that monkey king's, वचः words, श्रुत्वा on hearing, सर्वासु in all, दिक्षु in directions, विक्रान्तान् advancing, वानरान् monkeys, प्रेषयामास sent for.
4::37::10::राज्ञा by the king, प्रहिताः sent, ते they, पतत्रिज्योतिरध्वगाः those moving in the path of birds and heavenly bodies, क्षणेन in that moment, विष्णुविक्रान्तम् where Visnu moved about, पदम् path, प्रयाताः travelled, हरयः monkeys, वै indeed.
4::37::11::ते वानराः set his foot those monkeys, समुद्रेषु on the sea shore, गिरिषु on the mountains, वनेषु च in the forests, सरस्सु च  on the banks of lakes, सर्वान् all over, वानरान् monkeys, रामहेतोः  to serve Rama's cause, अचोदयन् driven.
4::37::12::वानराः monkeys, मृत्युकालोपमस्य  like god of death , राजराजस्य of king's, सुग्रीवस्य Sugriva's, आज्ञाम् command, श्रुत्वा on hearing, सुग्रीवभयदर्शिनः foreseeing fear from Sugriva, आययुः came.
4::37::13::ततः then, तस्मात् गिरेः from that mountain, प्लवङ्गनाम् of monkeys, महाजवाः swift moving, अञ्जनसङ्काशाः who were like collyrium, तिस्रः three, कोट्यः crores, राघवः Rama, यत्र wherever, निर्ययुः rushed forth.
4::37::14::यत्र wherever, अर्कः Sun, अस्तं गच्छति sets, तस्मिन् in that, गिरिवरे in the best of mountains, स्थिताः staying at, सन्तप्तहेममहाभास shining like pure molten gold, दश कोट्यः ten crores, तस्मात् from there, च्युताः moved out.
4::37::15::ततः then, सिंहकेसरवर्चसाम् of those having the colour of the lion's mane, वानराणाम् monkeys, कोटि सहस्राणि a thousand crores, कैलासशिखरेभ्यश्च from the peaks of Kailasa mountain, उपागमन् started.
4::37::16::फलमूलेन with fruits and roots, जीवन्तः those feeding on, हिमवन्तम् Himavan, उपाश्रिताः resorted to, तेषाम् them, कोटिसहस्राणाम् thousands of crores, सहस्रम् a thousand, समवर्तत was ready.
4::37::17::विन्ध्यात् from the Vindhya, अङ्गारकसमानानाम् like the Angaraka (fire), भीमानाम् fierceful, भीमकर्मणाम् of fierce deeds, वानरकोटीनाम् of crores of monkeys, सहस्राणि thousands, द्रुतम् swiftly, अपतन् came down.
4::37::18::क्षीरोदवेलानिलयाः those dwelling on the banks of the milky ocean, तमालवनवासिनः residents of Tamala forest, नारिकेलाशनाश्चैव those feeding on coconuts in the palm grove, तेषाम् of all of them, सङ्ख्या number, न विद्यते not exist.
4::37::19::महाजवा: swift movers, वानरी सेना army of monkeys, दिवाकरम् Sun, पिबन्तीव as if it was swallowing, वनेभ्यः from the forests, गह्वरेभ्यश्च from the caves, सरिद्भ्यश्च from the river banks, आगच्छत् came.
4::37::20::ये those, वानराः monkeys, सर्ववानरान् all the rest of monkeys, त्वरयितुम् to hasten, याताः they had gone, ते वीराः those heroes, हिमवच्छैलं the mountain Himavat, तम् that, महाद्रुमम्  great tree, ददृशुः saw.
4::37::21::रम्ये on the enchanting, तस्मिन् on that, गिरिवरे on the best of mountains, पुरा earlier, सर्वदेवमनस्तोषः made the minds of all deities happy, दिव्य: मनोहर: divine and wonderful, माहेश्वरः Lord Mahesvara, यज्ञः Yajna, बभौ was performed.
4::37::22::तत्र there, वानराः monkeys, अन्ननिष्यन्दजातानि produced out of the havis of the Yajna, अमृतास्वादकल्पानि sweet like nectar, मूलानि and roots, च and, फलानि च fruits also, ददृशुः they saw.
4::37::23::तदन्नसम्भवम् born out of that havis, दिव्यम् wonderful, मनोहरम् delicious, फलमूलम् fruits and roots, यः कश्चित् any one, सकृत् one, अश्नाति eats, मासम् for one month, तर्पितः contented, भवति he will be.
4::37::24::फलाशनाः those who live on fruits, हरियूथपाः monkey leaders, दिव्यानि divine, तानि them, मूलानि roots, फलानि च and fruits, दिव्यानि heavenly, औषधानि च and medicinal herbs, जगृहुः took.
4::37::25::वानराः monkeys, गत्वा having gone, तस्मात् from that, यज्ञायतनात् from that sacrificial altar, सुरभीणि finesmelling, पुष्पाणि च flowers also, सुग्रीवप्रियकारणात् for pleasing Sugriva, आनिन्युः collected them.
4::37::26::सर्वे all, ते हरिवराः those great monkeys, पृथिव्याम् on the earth, सर्ववानरान् all the monkeys, सञ्चोदयित्वा after guiding, यूथानाम् of the hordes, अग्रतः in the forefront, त्वरिता: quickly, जग्मुः proceeded.
4::37::27::शीघ्रगामिनः swiftwalkers, ते यूथपाः leaders of the groups, तेन मुहूर्तेन in that short time, वानरः monkeys, सुग्रीवः Sugriva, यत्र there, किष्किन्धाम् to Kishkinda, त्वरया quickly, प्राप्ताः reached.
4::37::28::ते वानराः those monkeys, सर्वाः all kinds of, ओषधीः medicinal herbs, फलमूलं च fruits and roots, गृहीत्वा having collected, तम् by them, प्रतिग्राहयामासुः in turn gifted to him (Sugriva), इदम् this, वचनम् word, अब्रुवन् च said.
4::37::29::सर्वे all, शैलाः mountains, समुद्रा: oceans, वनानि च and forests, परिगताः have been covered, ते your, शासनात् with command, पृथिव्याम् on the earth, वानराः vanaras, उपयान्ति they are coming.
4::37::30::ततः then, प्लवगाधिपः king of monkeys, सुग्रीवः Sugriva, एवम् in that way, श्रुत्वा on hearing, हृष्टः happy, तेषाम् their, सर्वम् entire, उपायनम् gift, तत् प्रीतः he was pleased with it, प्रतिजग्राह च and accepted them.
