4::21::1::Thereafter Hanuman, leader of the monkey clan, slowly consoled Tara who was (standing before her husband) like a star fallen from the sky.
4::21::2::'On departing from this mortal world an embodied soul reaps gradually the good and evil fruits of action performed under the notion of virtue or vice with an eye to their good or evil consequences.
4::21::3::'For whom do you grieve except for yourself? You are miserable. Who are you sympathising with? Who are you grieving for? When this body itself  is like a bubble, who is worth grieving for?
4::21::4::'You are mother of a surviving son, Angada. You have to look after him in times to come. Think of the duties to be performed now.
4::21::5::'You are aware of the uncertain and transient happenings in the lives of living beings. Therefore, a wise lady should do auspicious work in this world.
4::21::6::'Tens of millions of monkeys depended on this hero with their hopes on him. He has reached his ultimate destiny now to enjoy the fruits of his good deeds.
4::21::7::'This hero with a right vision, adopted the means of conciliation, charity and forgiveness (in his administration) and has finally reached a position through righteousness in his death. It is not proper to mourn for him.
4::21::8::'O blemishless lady these great monkeys including your son Angada and the entire kingdom of monkeys and bears are under your protection.
4::21::9::'O fair sex Encourage these two griefstricken heroes (Angada and Sugriva) gently. Let Angada rule this earth under your protection.
4::21::10::
4::21::11::'Let all the rituals of the king of vanaras be performed. Let Angada be consecrated. You will attain peace of mind to see your son seated on the throne.'
4::21::12::On hearing Hanuman's words, Tara, tormented by the death of her husband said to Hanuman who was waiting for her reply:
4::21::13::'To embrace even the deadbody of this hero is better than (to embrace) a hundred prototypes of Angada.
4::21::14::
4::21::15::'O Hanuman the best of monkeys, you need not think about (the future of) Angada. A father plans for a son and not (even) the mother.
4::21::16::There is nothing more befitting for me than joining the king of monkeys either here or in the next world. It is proper for me to resort to this resting place (pyre) used by this slain hero in front of me.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyfirst sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
