4::27::1::अभिषिक्ते after consecration, वानरे the money, सुग्रीवे Sugriva, गुहाम् cave, प्रविष्टे entered, रामः Rama, भ्रात्रा सह accompanied by his brother, प्रस्रवणं गिरिम् Prasravana mountain, आजगाम arrived.
4::27::2::शार्दूलमृगसङ्घुष्टम् filled with sounds of tigers and deer, भीमरवैः roaring in a terrific manner, सिंहैः with lions, वृतम् surrounded with, नानागुल्मलतागूढम् covered with different kinds of shrubs and creepers, बहुपादपसङ्कुलम् full of many kinds of trees, ऋक्षवानरगोपुच्छैः  bears, monkeys, and apes, मार्जारैश्च and wild cats, निषेवितम् inhabited, मेघराशिनिभम् like a huge cluster of clouds, नित्यम् always, शुचिजलाश्रमम् ponds of pure water, शैलम् mountain.
4::27::3::रामः Rama, सौमित्रिणा सह with Saumitri, तस्य शैलस्य  mountain's, शिखरे on the top, महतीम् great long, आयताम् wide, गुहाम् cave, वासार्थम्  to reside, प्रत्यगृह्णत  decided to reside.
4::27::4::अनघः sinless, रघुनन्दनः delight of the Raghu family, भ्राता brother, रामः Rama, सुग्रीवेण सह समयम् an agreement with Sugriva, कृत्वा after making, विनीतम् him who was obedient, भ्रातरम् to brother, लक्ष्मिवर्धनम् enhancer of glory, लक्ष्मणम् Lakshmana, कालयुक्तम्  appropriate for the time, महत् meaningful, वाक्यम् word, उवाच expressed.
4::27::5::अरिन्दम O subduer of enemies, सौमित्रे O Saumitri, रम्या beautiful, इयम् this, गिरिगुहा mountain cave, विशाला spacious, युक्तमारुता breezy, वर्षरात्रम् rainy nights, अस्याम् in this, वत्स्याम will reside.
4::27::6::पार्थिवात्मज O prince, श्वेताभिः with white, कृष्णताम्राभिः with black and red, शिलाभिः with stones, उपशोभितम् is very enchanting, नाना धातुसमाकीर्णम् with different kinds of minerals scattered all over, दरीनिर्झरशोभितम् having fascinating caves and waterfalls, विविधैः with different, वृक्षषण्डैश्च with clusters of trees, चारुचित्रलतायुतम् with fascinating vines, नानाविहगसङ्घुष्टम् crowded with different birds, मयूरवरनादितम् with sounds of peacocks, मालतीकुन्दगुल्मैश्च with bushes of delicate Jasmine and kunda, सिन्धुवारैः sindhuvara flower plants, शिरीषकै: sireeshaka trees, पुष्पितैः in bloom, सर्जैश्च and with sarja trees, उपशोभितम् very delighting, उत्तमम् best, इदम् this, गिरिशृङ्गम् this peak of mountain, उन्नतम् is lofty.
4::27::7::नृपात्मज son of a king, फ़ुल्लपङ्कजमण्डिता adorned with lotuses in full bloom, रम्या endearing, इयं नलिनी this lotus creeper, नौ for us, गुहायाः from the cave, नातिदूरे not far from here, भविष्यति is located.
4::27::8::सौम्य goodnatured Lakshmana, प्रागुदक्प्रवणे descending path in the northeast, देशे of this place, गुहा cave, साधु auspicious, भविष्यति it will be, पश्चात् west side, उन्नता elevated, इयम् this, निवाता free from strong wind.
4::27::9::सौमित्रे O Saumitri, गुहाद्वारे at the entrance of the cave, समतला even, शुभा good, श्लक्ष्णा smooth, आयताचैव large, भिन्नाञ्जनचयोपमा resembling a heap of shining collyrium, शिला a rock.
4::27::10::तात O dear, उत्तरतः in the north, भिन्नाञ्जनचयाकारम् shaped like a heap of collyrium, उत्थितम् risen, अम्भोधरमिव like a raincloud, शुभम् auspicious, इदम् this, पश्य see, गिरिशृङ्गम् mountain peak, इदम this.
4::27::11::दक्षिणस्यांदिशि in the southern direction, स्थितम् is located, श्वेतम् white, इवापरम् like another, कैलासशिखर प्रख्यम् like the tip of Kailasa mountain, नानाधातुविभूषितम् rich with various minerals.  
4::27::12::प्राचीनवाहिनीम् flowing towards the east, भृशम् greatly, अकर्दमाम् pure, चन्दनैः with sandalwood, तिलकैः with tilaka, सालैः with sala, तमा tamala, अतिमुक्तकैः with  atimuktaka (a lustrous jasmine creeper which sheds flowers profusely), पद्मकैः with Padmaka, सरलैश्चैव with sarala, अशोकैश्चैव and with asoka, शोभिताम् fascinating, त्रिकूटे at Trikuta, जाह्नवीमिव like the river Jahnavi, नदीम् river, गुहायाः from the caves, पूर्वतः to the east, पश्य see.
4::27::13::तीरजैः  grown on the bank, नानारूपैः different kinds of, ततस्ततः here and there, वानीरैः with cane reeds, तिमिशै: timis, एव with,वकुलैः vakula,केतकैर्धवै: ketaka, हिन्तालैः hintala, तिनिशैः tinisa, नीपैः (नीपवृक्षैः) kadamba trees, वेत्रकैः cane creepers, धवैः dhavas, कृतमालकैः krutamalaka, वेतसैः  betasa, शोभिता beautiful, वसनाभरणोपेता with clothes and ornaments, अभ्यलङ्कृता decorated, प्रमदेव like a woman, भाति looks.
4::27::14::शतशः in hundreds, पक्षिसङ्घैश्च with flocks of birds, नानानादैर्विनादिता resounded with different melodies, एकैकम् each one, अनुरक्तैश्च by the loving ones, चक्रवाकैः by ruddy geese, अलङ्कृता beautified, अतिरम्यैः enchanting, पुलिनैः sandy banks, हंससारससेवितैः filled with swans and watercranes, एषा this, सर्वविभूषिता decorated all over, प्रहसन्ती laughing, नारीव  like a young woman, भाति shines.
4::27::15::क्वचित् at one place, नीलोत्पलैः with blue lotuses, क्वचित् at another place, रक्तोत्पलैः with red lotuses, छन्ना covered, भाति splendid looking, क्वचित् at some places, शुक्लैश्च with white lotuses, दिव्यैः wonderful, कुमुदकुट्मलैः lotus buds, आभाति appears.
4::27::16::पारिप्लवशतैः with hundreds of waterbirds, जुष्टा a favoured spot, बर्हिक्रौञ्चविनादिता resounding with peacocks and krauncha birds, मुनिसङ्घैर्निषेविता inhabited by many groups of sages, सौम्या placid, नदी river, रमणीया beautiful.
4::27::17::चन्दनवृक्षाणाम् of sandalwood trees, सुरचिता इव as if arranged, पङ्क्ती: in rows, पश्य see, समम् made uniform, मनसा इव as if imaginatively, उदिताः they have grown, ककुभानां च of the direction, दृश्यन्ते they are seen.
4::27::18::शत्रुनिषूदन O destroyer of enemies, सौमित्रे Saumitri, अयम् this, देशः place, सुरमणीयः most enchanting, अहो Oh, अत्र here, साधु well, निवसावहै  both will reside, दृढम् surely, रंस्याव we will sport in joy.
4::27::19::नृपात्मज O prince, चित्रकानना wonderful forest, रम्या delightful place, सुग्रीवस्य पुरी Sugriva's city, सा किष्किन्धा Kishkinda, नातिदूरे not far, इत: from here, भविष्यति is located.
4::27::20::जयतां वर great hero among the victorious, गीतवादित्र निर्घोषः sounds of vocal and musical instruments, नर्दताम् making sounds, वानराणां च of monkeys, मृदङ्गाडम्बरैः सह and beating of drums, श्रूयते is heard.
4::27::21::कपिवरः monkey chief, सुग्रीवः Sugriva, भार्याम् wife, लब्ध्वा having obtained, राज्यम् kingdom, प्राप्य having attained, महतीम् very great, श्रियम् prosperity, सम्प्राप्य having earned, सहृद्वृतः surrounded by friends and relatives, नन्दति he is enjoying, ध्रुवम् surely.
4::27::22::राघवः Rama, इति thus, उक्त्वा having said so, बहुदृश्यदरीकुञ्जे in a spot of many caverns and shrubs of vines, तस्मिन् that, प्रस्रवणे गिरौ Prasravana mountain, तत्र there, सहलक्ष्मण: along with Lakshmana, न्यवसत् he resided.
4::27::23::सुसुखे in comfort, बहुद्रव्ये richly endowed, तस्मिन् in that, धरणीधरे on that mountain, वसतः while residing, तस्य रामस्य for that Rama's, अल्पापि even a little, रतिः pleasure, नाभवत् was not experienced.
4::27::24::विशेषतः specially, उदयाऽभ्युदितम् rising, शशाङ्कम् Moon, दृष्ट्वा seeing, हृताम् abducted, प्राणेभ्योऽपि more than his life, गरीयसी a very dear lady, भार्याम् wife, स्मरतः  remembering. 
4::27::25::तत्समुत्थेन rising, शोकेन by grief, बाष्पोपहतचेतसम् mind befogged with tears, निशासु nights, शयनम् while lying in bed, गतम् gone, तम् he, निद्रा sleep, न आविवेश did not take hold him, निशासु during nights.
4::27::26::शोचमानम् who was worried, नित्यम् perpetually, शोकपरायणम्  engrossed in sorrow, तम् him, काकुत्स्थम् Kakutstha (Rama), अनुनयन् consoling, तुल्यदुःखः an equally sad man, भ्राता brother, लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, वचः words, अब्रवीत् said.
4::27::27::वीर O hero, व्यथाम् pain, गत्वा अलम् stop it, त्वम् you, शोचितुम् to worry, न अर्हसि you do not deserve, शोचतः by grieving, सर्वार्थाः all objects, व्यवसीदन्ति हि sink, ते to you, विदितं हि you are aware of this.
4::27::28::अव्यवसितः a man of no enterprise, त्वम् you, विक्रमैः with valiant advances, जिह्मकारिणम्  crooked, शत्रुम् enemy, विशेषतः specially, राक्षसम् demon, तम् him, रणे in war, हन्तुम् to slay, समर्थः न हि will not have the capacity, भवान् you, लोके in this world, कियापर a man of action, भवान् you, देवपरायणः devoted to gods, आस्तिक  faithful , धर्मशील:च  righteous also, व्यवसायी च also enterprising,राघव O Rama.
4::27::29::त्वम् you, शोकम् sorrow, समुन्मूलय  may uproot, व्यवसायम् daring, स्थिरं कुरु be firm in resolve, ततः then, सपरिवारम् along with all relatives, तं निर्मूलं  him destroy, कुरु you do, राक्षसम् that demon.
4::27::30::काकुत्स्थ O Kakutstha, ससागरवनाचलाम् with oceans, forests and mountains, पृथिवीमपि the entire earth, परिवर्तयितुम् can turn, शक्तः able, रावणम् that  Ravana, किं पुनः what more?
4::27::31::अयम् this, प्रावृट्कालः rainy season, आगतः has set in, शरत्कालम् autumn, प्रतीक्षस्व you may wait for, ततः then, सराष्ट्रम् along with his country, सगणम् along with his troops, त्वं you, रावणम्  Ravana, वधिष्यसि will slay.
4::27::32::अहम् I am, काले in proper time, दीप्सैः with smouldering fire, आहुतिभिः with offerings, भस्मच्छन्नम् covered with ashes, अनलम् इव like fire, ते your, प्रसुप्तम् dormant, वीर्यम् courage, प्रतिबोधये खलु I am awakening.
4::27::33::राघवः Rama, लक्ष्मणस्य Lakshmana's, हितम् good counsel, शुभम् auspicious, तत् वाक्यम् those words, प्रतिपूज्य respecting, सुहृदम् warm hearted, स्निग्धं loving, इदं वचनम् these words, अब्रवीत् spoke.
4::27::34::लक्ष्मण Lakshmana, अनुरक्तेन by an affectionate man, स्निग्धेन by a friendly man, हितेन च  by a wellwisher, सत्यविक्रमयुक्तेन by a person endowed with true valour, यत् such, वाच्यम् words said, तत् that, त्वया by you, उक्तम् has been said.
4::27::35::सर्वकार्यावसादकः which can destroy all work, एषःthis, शोकः sorrow, परित्यक्तः is given up, अहम् I, विक्रमेषु during heroic exploits, अप्रतिहतम् unaffected, तेजः vigour प्रोत्सहयामि  I will resort to
4::27::36::सुग्रीवस्य Sugriva's, नदीनां च and rivers, प्रसादम् pleasure, अनुपालयन् waiting for, शरत्कालम् for autumn, प्रतीक्षिष्ये I will wait, तव your, वचने words, स्थितः अस्मि  resolute.
4::27::37::उपकारेण with him, वीरः hero, प्रतीकारेण by helping in turn, युज्यते will not fail to do, अकृतज्ञः ungrateful, अप्रतिकृतः one who does not return a favour, सत्त्ववताम् spirited people's, मनः heart, हन्ति destroys.
4::27::38::लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, अथ thereupon, एवम् in this way ,उक्त: told, प्रणिधाय after reflecting thoughtfully, कृताञ्जलिः with folded palms in suplication, तत् that, भाषितम् words expresed, प्रतिपूज्य after honouring, आत्मनः his own, शुभम् auspicious, दर्शनम् view, प्रदर्शयन्   expressing, स्वभिरामदर्शनम् him who is handsome, रामम् Rama, उवाच said.
4::27::39::नरेन्द्र king, यथा as, अद्धरीश्वर excellant king, नचिरात् soon, तव your, ईप्सितम् desire, एतत् सर्वम् all this, कर्ता going to do, रिपुनिग्रहे to combat with the enemy, धृतः be determined, भवान् thyself, शरत्प्रतीक्षः waiting for autumn, इमम् this, जलप्रपातम् waterflow, क्षमताम्  forgive.
4::27::40::शत्रुवधे in slaying of enemies, समुद्यमम् effort, क्षमस्व you may pardon, कोपम् anger, नियम्य controlling, शरत् autumn, प्रतिपाल्यताम् you may wait for, चतुरः four, मासान् months, संवर्तयन्  carrying out, मृगराजसेविते inhabited by lions, अस्मिन् अचले on this mountain, मया सह along with me, वस stay.
