4::64::1::Hearing the words spoken by the king of vultures, the highly courageous monkeys assembled together and leaped with joyscreaming.
4::64::2::On hearing the words of Sampati, the monkeys felt glad and, eager to see Sita, reached the ocean, the passage to the abode of Ravana. 
4::64::3::Having reached the ocean, the monkeys, endowed with frightening courage, stood looking at the vast ocean which appeared like an image of the whole world.
4::64::4::Powerful and heroic monkeys assembled at the northern end of the southern ocean.
4::64::5::The ocean was of terrifying form filled with various violent species of grotesque creatures of huge bodies playing in the water. Full of violent tides, it appeared asleep at one place and apparently sporting in another. In some places it was rising as high as a mountain with huge volumes of water. It was as if roaring with the demon chiefs residing in the underworld. The great monkeys were worried seeing the huge ocean which created horripilation in them.
4::64::6::All the monkeys were worried when they suddenly saw the ocean which looked impassable like the sky. They wondered if they can at all accomplish the task (of finding Sita)
4::64::7::Angada, the best among the monkeys saw the worried army despondent gazing at the ocean, and comforted the frightened troops.
4::64::8::Angada,the strong and wise  son of Vali, spoke thus to the tensed vanaras in the right time: 
4::64::9::'Do not be despondent. It is the biggest flaw. It destroys a person like an angry serpent killing a young child.
4::64::10::'If one succumbs to despondency while he has to exhibit his valour, his brilliance gets diminished and he does not succeed in his manly pursuits'. 
4::64::11::With the night over, Angada joined the older monkeys again and sought their counsel.
4::64::12::The army of monkeys encircled Angada like the army of Maruts surrounding Indra.
4::64::13::Who else other than the son of Vali and Hanuman can resist and pacify the monkeyarmy? 
4::64::14::Then the illustrious Angada, subduer of foes took the counsel of elderly monkeys and  the army into confidence and thus addressed them all in meaningful words:
4::64::15::'Now which mighty monkey will cross the ocean? Who will prove Sugriva, subduer of enemies, true to his promise?
4::64::16::'O monkeys which one can leap a hundred yojanas and liberate the monkey leaders from the great fear of Sugriva?
4::64::17::'By whose effort can we be successful and return home happily from here to meet wives and sons?
4::64::18:: 'By whose grace shall we approach Rama and Lakshmana and even the monkey king Sugriva happily?
4::64::19::'If there is any one among you who is capable of leaping  across the ocean he will be giving all of us the sacred gift of life quickly?'
4::64::20::After hearing Angada, no one spoke a word. The entire army of monkeys became still and motionless.
4::64::21::Angada, the best of the monkeys again addressed them saying, 'you are all mighty, eminent and courageous, born in renowned families and have been honoured again and again(for your actions).
4::64::22::'None of you at any time have faced any obstruction in doing your deeds. You are efficient  in leaping. O bulls among monkeys now speak out, who among you can fly and how far?इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे चतुष्षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyfourth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
