4::44::1::सुग्रीवः Sugriva, विशेषेण particularly, हनूमति in Hanuman, अर्थम् purpose (of the mission), उक्तवान् mentioned, सः he, अर्थसाधने in accomplishing the goal, तस्मिन् हरिश्रेष्ठे great among the monkeys, निश्चितार्थः हि one who was sure of success. 
4::44::2::सर्ववनौकसाम् for all the monkeys, प्रभुः king, सुग्रीवः Sugriva, परमप्रीतः very pleased, विक्रान्तम् advancing, अनिलात्मजम् son of the Windgod, हनूमन्तम् to Hanumanta, अब्रवीच्च spoke.
4::44::3::हरिपुङ्गव O best of monkeys, भूमौ on earth, ते to you, गतिसङ्गम् who can equal your movement, न पश्यामि I do not see, अन्तरिक्षे वा or in space, न nor, अम्बरे in sky, न nor, अमरालये in heaven, न nor, अप्सु वा or in water.
4::44::4::सासुराः including demons, सहगन्धर्वाः along with gandharvas, सनागनरदेवताः along with the nagas, men and gods, ससागरधराधराः including on the seas, mountains, सर्वलोकाः all worlds, ते to you, विदिताः are known.
4::44::5::वीर O hero, महाकपे O great monkey, ते your, गतिः in movement, वेगश्च in speed, तेजश्च in brilliance, लाघवं च in movement and speed, पितुः father's, महौजसः mighty, मारुतस्य of the Windgod, सदृशम् similar.
4::44::6::तेजसा वापि in brilliance, ते to you, समम् equal, भूतम् a being, भुवि in the world, न विद्यते does not exist, तत् therefore, सीता Sita, यथा as such, लभ्यते is secured, तत् that way, त्वमेव you alone, अपपादय should go ahead.
4::44::7::नयपण्डित O learned one, हनुमन् Hanuman, बलम् strength, बुद्धिः wisdom, पराक्रमः prowess, देशकालानुवृत्तिश्च acting in accordance with time and place, नयश्च  knowledge of statecraft, त्वय्येव in you only, अस्ति I exist.
4::44::8::ततः then, राघवः Rama, हनूमति in Hanuman, कार्यसमासङ्गम् responsibility of achieving the goal, अवगम्य having understood, हनुमन्तं च Hanuman also, विदित्वा knowing, चिन्तयामास reflected.
4::44::9::अयम् this, हरीश्वरः monkey king, सर्वथा all means, हनूमति Hanumanta, निश्चितार्थः sure, कार्यसाधने in accomplishing the task, हनुमान् Hanuman, निश्चितार्थकरश्चापि sure of accomplishing the task.
4::44::10::तत् since, एवम् in that way, प्रस्थितस्य of a person who goes forth, कर्मभिः with his tasks, परिज्ञातस्य who is known, भर्त्रा king Sugriva, परिगृहीतस्य favoured, अस्य his, कार्यफलोदयः success in his task, ध्रुवः sure.
4::44::11::महातेजाः mighty Rama, व्यवसायोत्तरम् with a resolute answer, तम् him, Hanuman, हरिम् monkey, समीक्ष्य on looking at, प्रहृष्टेन्द्रियमानसः very glad at heart, कृतार्थ इव as if he has accomplished, संवृत्तः he became.
4::44::12::ततः then, परन्तपः scorcher of enemies, प्रीतः delighted, स्वनामाङ्कोपशोभितम् one on which his name is inscribed, अङ्गुलीयम् ring, राजपुत्र्या: to the princess, अभिज्ञानम् as a token of recognition, तस्य to him, ददौ gave.
4::44::13::हरिश्रेष्ठ O distinguished monkey, अनेन by this, चिह्नेन by this signet, जनकात्मजा Janaka's daughter, त्वाम् you, मत्सकाशात् from me, अनुप्राप्तम् have come to her, अनुद्विग्ना without any hesitation, अनुपश्यति will greet you.
4::44::14::वीर O hero, ते your, व्यवसायः efforts, सत्त्वयुक्तः endowed with prowess, विक्रमश्च courage, सुग्रीवस्य Sugriva's, सन्देशश्च message to you, मे to me, सिद्धिम् achievement, कथयतीव as if telling me.
4::44::15::प्लवगोत्तमः foremost of the monkeys, सः he, हरिश्रेष्ठः greatest of monkeys, गृह्य after taking, मूर्ध्नि on his forehead, स्थाप्य after placing, कृताञ्जलिः saluted with folded palms, चरणौ चैव and the feet also, वन्दित्वा having offered salutation, प्रस्थितः departed.
4::44::16::हरीणाम् of monkeys, महत् great, तत् बलम् that army, प्रकर्षन् being foremost among them, वीरः hero, पवनात्मजः son of the Windgod, सः कपिः that monkey, गताम्बुदे cloudless, व्योम्नि in the sky, नक्षत्रगणोपशोभितः adorned by hosts of stars, शशीव like the Moon, बभूव appeared.
4::44::17::अतिबल O mighty one, हरिवरविक्रम O valiant among the vanaras, पवनसुत O son of the Windgod, हनुमन् O Hanuman, अहम् I, तव your, बलम् strength, आश्रितः depending, अनल्पैः with mighty, विक्रमैः valour, सा that, जनकसुता daughter of Janaka, यथा in such a way, अभिगम्यते can be found, तथा in such a way that, कुरुष्व do.
