4::31::1::Seeing the indomitable hero, his elder brother, son of a king, lovesick, dejected and overcome by anger and grief, spoke prince Lakshmana: 
4::31::2::'Sugriva has not stuck to the conduct of the virtuous, of sharing the fruits of action equally. He does not realize that he obtained the prosperous kingship of vanaras as a result of your (friendly) action. He does not have the intelligence of conducting himself in your favour (of searching Sita). Therefore he will not enjoy the kingship for long.
4::31::3::'O hero he is too ungrateful to return the favour done to him, Engaged in rustic, vulgar pleasures, he is not thinking of it. Let him see his killed elder brother. Kingship should not be given to an individual who is a destitute of virtues. 
4::31::4::'I cannot hold my overflowing anger. I shall kill this untruthful Sugriva. Let Vali's son along with the foremost of monkeys search for the queen (Sita).'
4::31::5::Rama, a slayer of enemy heroes but not of those who seek his refuge, spoke in a conciliatory tone to Lakshmana who jumped, wielding bow and arrows, inspired with his fierce fighting spirit.
4::31::6::
4::31::7::'O Lakshmana with your good conduct you should not do so.  Keeping in view the affectionate friendship extended (by Sugriva) earlier, be friendly.
4::31::8::'Sugriva has exceeded the time limit. Avoiding harsh words, you ought to speak to him in a conciliatory manner.
4::31::9::Having been duly briefed by his elder brother, the heroic Lakshmana, destroyer of enemies, a bull among men entered the city.   
4::31::10::The noblehearted, benevolent and wise Lakshmana, eager to please Rama, picked up his bow looking like a mountain peak, comparable to the bow of Indra and agitated with the anger of the god of Death entered the mansion of Sugriva which stood like the mountain peak of Mandara. 
4::31::11::Then Lakshmana, obedient, intelligent like Brihaspati, like a tempest, encompassed by the fire of anger and deliberating in his mind as to the possible questions from Sugriva and the reply from him.
4::31::12::'Lakshmana rushed on foot speedily, cutting the branches of sala, tala and asvakarna and other trees on the way  and forcibly turning and crushing the mountain rocks into pieces with a single foot, like a swiftmoving elephant taking long strides, to carry out the task.
4::31::13::The tiger of the Ikshvaku race saw the inaccessible Kishkinda, the capital of vanara kingdom, located between mountains and fortified with the army.
4::31::14::His lips trembling in anger, Lakshmana saw fierceful monkey guards of Sugriva at the entrance of Kishkinda city.
4::31::15::Hundreds of monkeys of the size of elephants stood holding huge trees and boulders of rocks on seeing Lakshmana, the bull among men.
4::31::16::On seeing the monkeys wielding weapons, Lakshmana's anger doubled like logs of firewood put to burning.
4::31::17::Seeing enraged Lakshmana, who looked like a veritable god of Death at the time of dissolution of the universe, hundreds of monkeys, their limbs trembling in fear ran in different directions.
4::31::18::Having entered Sugriva's palace, the monkeychiefs reported the arrival of angry Lakshmana.
4::31::19::But Sugriva who was engrossed in overtures with passionate Tara, did not heed the words of the monkeychiefs.
4::31::20::Commanded by the ministers, the monkeys who looked like fierce mountains, elephants and clouds that caused horripilation, left the place at once. 
4::31::21::The monkeys, their faces, deformed, their nails and teeth like weapons were dreadful and horrifying in appearance, proud as tigers
4::31::22::Of them some possessed the strength of ten, some a hundred and some a thousand elephants. All of them were of equal valour. 
4::31::23::Enraged Lakshmana saw the huge inacccessible city of Kishkinda filled with  mighty strong and fierce monkeys holding trees in hand.
4::31::24::The mighty monkeys came out of the entrance of the ironboundary wall from beneath and made their appearance and stood in full attention.
4::31::25::The sensible warrior, recognising Sugriva's dereliction of duty and his own brother's agony once again flew into fury.
4::31::26::Sighing hot, deep breath, eyes turned red in anger, this tiger among men appeared like fire with smoke (The sigh was smoke and red eyes, fire).
4::31::27::His bow was like the hood of a snake,with the iron nails fixed on the tip of his arrows like moving fangs and his own brightness like the venom of the fivehooded snake.
4::31::28::Dismayed, Angada approached Lakshmana, who was glowing like fire at the time of dissolution of the world and enraged like the lord of serpents.
4::31::29::Renowned Lakshmana, with his eyes turned red in anger said to Angada 'O dear, inform Sugriva, about my arrival'.
4::31::30::'O subduer of enemies speak in this way: 'Lakshmana, the dear younger brother of Rama has come to you and waits for your presence at the entrance, burning in grief of his elder brother. Well, if you like to hear his words, do as you please.' 'Return swiftly after saying so.'
4::31::31::On hearing Lakshmana's words Angada became sad. He approached his father (Sugriva) and said 'Saumitri has come'. (This sloka appears an interpolation).
4::31::32:: On hearing Lakshmana's words powerful Angada felt agitated. His face turned pale. He went and prostrated at once to the king and then to the queen, Ruma.
4::31::33::Highly brilliant Angada holding his father's feet first, then mother's and thereafter Ruma's, reported the matter to  Sugriva.
4::31::34::The monkey was too drowsy with drink, too intoxicated with passion to come back to his senses.
4::31::35::Looking at angry Lakshmana, and scared at heart, the monkeys started making a noise in order to please him.
4::31::36::They saw Lakshmana advancing like a mighty flood and went near him making sounds like the thunderbolt or a lion.
4::31::37::By the great sound (of the monkeys) the drunken redeyed vanara king awakened, his garlands and ornaments in disarray. 
4::31::38::On hearing Angada's words the two ministers named Plaksha and Prabhava who were perrmitted to have audience with the queens went to the harem on invitation from Angada. They reported to Sugriva about the arrival of Lakshmana who had come to speak to him about matters regading wealth and righteousness.
4::31::39::Both of them sat close by Sugriva who was like Indra and said these pleasing words:
4::31::40::'Rama and Lakshmana, both the brothers venerable and true to their promise, have conferred on you sovereignty and have extended friendship.'
4::31::41::'Of the two, only Lakshmana is standing at the entrance wielding his bow in hand. The monkeys are trembling in fear and running about, making a loud noise'.
4::31::42::'By the command of Rama, his brother has come to you, Rama's words as charioteer and his work as chariot'. 
4::31::43::'O blameless king Tara's son, Angada, has sent us into your presence. Lakshmana has come.'
4::31::44::'O lord of monkeys Valiant Lakshmana is standing at the entrance,eyes filled with anger as if he would burn the vanaras'.
4::31::45::'O great king Go at once with your son and relations, salute him now and avert his anger'.
4::31::46::'O king be true to your promise to his brother, righteous Rama without fail. Honour the agreement.'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyfirst sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic, composed by sage Valmiki.
