4::3::1::Listening to great Sugriva, Hanuman leaped from mount Rishyamuka on to the location of the Raghavas.
4::3::2::Hanuman, son of the Windgod, with an ingenious mind assumed the guise of a mendicant.
4::3::3::Approaching the Raghavas in all humility, valiant Hanuman offered them reverential salutations and addressed them in gentle and pleasing words.
4::3::4:: The valiant son of the Windgod, Hanuman offered those heroes whose power came from their sense of truth due respect and spoke to them in all gentleness:
4::3::5::'You both fair in complexion, resemble royal sages or gods. You appear like ascetics and pursue vows in austerity. How come, you are present here, as if to frighten the animals and other creatures roaming this forest?
4::3::6::'Gazing at the trees on the bank of Pampa, you both appear in brilliant complexion as if to enhance the beauty of the auspicious river water. Though young, courageous and with handsome shoulders, you seem to sigh in exhaustion. And though you look like ascetics robed in bark,  you seem to terrify these creatures.
4::3::7::'Having the gaze  of a lion, both of you are heroic in your stance. As each of you hold a bow resembling the rainbow, you seem to be mighty warriors eager to annihilate the enemies. With the valour of superior bulls and your shoulders resembling elephant's trunks, you look magnificent, handsome and brilliant. (No doubt,) you are the best among the humans.
4::3::8::'You are young and radiant like the gods. This king of mountains (Rishyamuka) dazzles with your brilliance. Although you deserve to be sovereigns, how is it that you are here (into the forest)?
4::3::9::'Both of you appear alike, with eyes like lotus petals and locks of matted hair. You look like heroes descending from the world of the gods. You look like the Sun and the Moon dropped incidentally on this earth. With shoulders like those of a lion and the majesty of energetic bulls, you broadchested warriors appear like divine beings, though in fact humans.
4::3::10::'Your long arms and spherelike shoulders appear as strong as iron clubs. Although they deserve to be decked with ornaments, how is it they are unadorned?
4::3::11::'To me, you both deserve to rule the entire earth encompassed by seas and forests and adorned with mountains like Vindhya and Meru.
4::3::12::'Smeared with wonderful unguents, (your) bows look  very attractive. And they glow very much like Indra's golden thunderbolt.
4::3::13::'(Your) quivers also appear beautiful, for they are  fully  filled with sharp and deadly arrows which look like the hissing of dreadful snakes  
4::3::14::'(Your) long and broad swords appear very huge in size. Being encrusted with pure gold, they  glitter brilliant like snakes in hyberation.
4::3::15::'Why are you silent  while I am talking? (I am here to apprise ) about a great and righteous warrior Sugriva, the chief of the troop of monkeys, sadly wandering all over the land here, banished by his brother
4::3::16::'I am a monkey called Hanuman. I am here sent by  great king Sugriva, the best of monkeys.
4::3::17::'The righteous Sugriva wishes to make friendship with both of you. For his wellbeing I came here disguised as a mendicant from  Rishyamuka mountain. I am a monkey, son of the Windgod and minister to Sugriva. I can assume any form at my free will and go anywhere I like'.  
4::3::18::The eloquent Hanuman, having spoken thus to both Rama and Lakshmana, good at speaking, said no more.
4::3::19::Having heard him, the Illustrious Rama cheerfully said to brother Lakshmana standing nearby:
4::3::20::'Here is minister to Sugriva, the great chief of monkeys whom I wish to see.
4::3::21::'O Saumitri, conqueror of enemies this monkey, Sugriva's minister, is skilled in friendly communication. Reply to him in words gentle and sweet.
4::3::22::'Unless wellversed in Rigveda, Yajurveda and Samaveda, for sure, it is not possible for anyone to articulate so well.
4::3::23::'Surely, he seems to have studied well the whole of grammar, for there is not a single mispronunciation in his entire speech.
4::3::24::<p>No fault can be found in his face, eyes, forehead, between the eyebrows or any other part of his body (during his expression).</p>
4::3::25::<p>His sentences are not too elaborate, not ambiguous, not dragging, not fast, raised in the chest or throat, in a medium tone.</p>
4::3::26::'His words are auspicious. They are refined. Neither fast nor slow, his utterances captivate the heart.
4::3::27::'His colourful words flow from all the three sources: the bottom of his bosom, his throat and his head. Whose mind will not adore them even if one happens to be an enemy holding a sword?
4::3::28::'O sinless one, how can a king, whoever he be, not accomplish his goal in the past with such an ambassador?
4::3::29::<p>Whoever has such great taskmasters of great qualities as their envoys, can have all their goals accomplished, driven by their diplomatic skills. </p>
4::3::30::Thus instructed, Saumitri who was equally skilled in speach replied to Sugriva's minister, son of the Windgod
4::3::31::'O learned Hanuman having heard about the virtues of  great Sugriva, lord of the monkeys, we eagerly look forward to meeting him
4::3::32::'O virtuous Hanuman we will do whatever you are saying, for it is the message of Sugriva.
4::3::33::Pleased with Lakshmana's words spoken in a skilful manner, Hanuman, the monkey son of the Windgod, resolved to make friendship with them.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे तृतीयस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the third sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
