4::2::1:: On seeing the two great souls, heroic Rama and Lakshmana wielding the best of weapons, Sugriva was alarmed.
4::2::2::Agitated at heart, the best of vanaras started in all directions and could not settle down at one spot.
4::2::3::Beholding the two strong heroes, the monkey (Sugriva) was very much frightened. His heart sank.
4::2::4::Righteous Sugriva, became highly agitated, deliberated with all his followers on the pros and cons of the situation.
4::2::5::Sugriva, lord of monkeys, extremely agitated at the sight of both Rama and Lakshmana, spoke to his minister:
4::2::6:: 
4::2::7::On seeing these supreme bowmen, Sugriva's counsellers left for the peak of another mountain.
4::2::8:: The leaders of the monkey troops  reached Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, in no time  and stood surrounding him. 
4::2::9:: Jumping  from one mountain to another swiftly and shaking the mountain tops, the monkeys reached one spot. 
4::2::10::Then the mighty monkeys jumping on the trees in full bloom shook them.
4::2::11::The great monkeys went on leaping all over the great (Rishyamuka) mountain,   scaring the deer, wildcats and tigers.
4::2::12::Thereafter, all the ministers of Sugriva assembled together on the king of mountains and stood (in front of Sugriva), with folded hands.
4::2::13::Suspecting that Vali might have sent them (Rama and Lakshmana), Hanuman, skilful in communication, said to Sugriva who was trembling in fear:
4::2::14::'This is a great mountain range of Malaya and there is no fear for Vali here. Give up this fear.
4::2::15::'O chief of monkeys I do not see here any sign of the cruel Vali, of whom you are afraid.
4::2::16::'O goodnatured Sugriva you are afraid of your elder brother Vali as he is evilminded and sinful. (But) I do not see any reason for you to be frightened as he is not found anywhere here.
4::2::17::'Oh monkey, whoever is lilylivered cannot be steady. It is evident that your very nature as a monkey makes you restless.
4::2::18::
4::2::19::Having heard the wise words of Hanuman, Sugriva addressed him with words more auspicious.
4::2::20::'Who would not be apprehensive of these two longarmed and largeeyed individuals     comparable to sons of gods wielding arrows, bows and swords.
4::2::21::'I support these two excellent men might have been sent by Vali. Kings have many friends and so it may not be appropriate to trust any king.
4::2::22::'One has to identify these men roaming in disguise. These are not trustworthy and could even be our enemies, making us believe them so as to attack us when we are not vigilant.
4::2::23::'Vali is wise in his actions. Kings employ many strategies to annihilate their enemies. Our gullible individuals should be able to detect them.
4::2::24::'O Hanuman assume an ordinary form and approach them. Try to read them through their gestures, traits, forms and conversations.
4::2::25::'O best of monkeys ascertain their purpose by praising them and studying their honest intentions. Gain the confidence of the wielders of bows and if you find them agreeable, enquire the purpose of their entering this forest.
4::2::26::'O best of monkeys find out whether they are noble in their intentions or evil in their design through your conversation with them.'
4::2::27::Instructed thus by the king of the monkeys, Hanuman, son of the Windgod, decided to meet both Rama and Lakshmana.
4::2::28:: Hanuman, the venerable, powerful and not easily conquerable monkey, honoured the words of the great Lord of the monkeys, offered salutations and said 'So be it'. And then proceeded towards the mighty Rama and Lakshmana.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे द्वितीयस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the second sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by the sage Valmiki.
