4::61::1::ततः then, सहसा rashly, कृतम् done, दुष्करम् impetuous, दारुणम् arrogant, तत् कर्म that deed, तदा then, सूर्यानुगमनम् following the Sun, सर्वम् everything, मुनेः to the sage, आचचक्षे I revealed.
4::61::2::भगवन् O revered sage, व्रणयुक्तत्वात् body being wounded, लज्जया च due to shame, व्याकुलेन्द्रियः with senses disturbed, परिश्रान्तः exhausted, वचनम् these words, परिभाषितुम् to express, न शक्नोमि I am not able to do.
4::61::3::अहं चैव I also, जटायुश्च Jatayu also, दर्पमोहितौ deluded by pride, पराक्रमम् valour, वीरौ two heroes, जिज्ञासन्तौ with the intention of knowing, सङ्घर्षात् challenging each other, दूरात् from far, आकाशम् sky, पतितौ we flew.
4::61::4::कैलासशिखरे on the peak of Kailasa, मुनीनाम् of sages, अग्रतः in their presence, महागिरिम्  great mountain, अस्तं यावत् till the setting, रविः Sun, अनुयातव्यः follow, स्यात् be, पणम् bet, बद्ध्वा made. 
4::61::5::अथ and then, आवाम् both of us, युगपत् simultaneously, प्राप्तौ both reaching, महीतले on the land, रथचक्रप्रमाणानि the size of chariot wheels, नगराणि cities, पृथक् पृथक् one after another, अपश्याव we both saw.
4::61::6::क्वचित् at some places, वादित्रघोषांश्च sounds of musical instruments, ब्रह्मघोषांश्च sounds of Vedic chanting, शुश्रुवः we heard, गायन्ती: ladies singing, रक्तवासस: clothed in red  garments, बह्वीः many, अङ्गनाः women, पश्यावः we both saw. 
4::61::7::आकाशम् sky, तूर्णम् quickly, उत्पत्य flying, आदित्यपदम् Sun's path, आश्रितौ we reached, आवाम् we both, तत् वनम् that forest, शाद्वलसन्निभम् like a lawn of grass, आलोकयावः we saw.
4::61::8::भूः land, शिलोच्चयैः with tall mountains, उपलैः with pebbles, सञ्छन्ना इव as though it is covered, दृश्यते looked, आपगाभिः by rivers, वसुन्धरा land, सूत्रैः with threads, संवीता इव as if entwined.
4::61::9::हिमवांश्चैव even Himalaya , विन्ध्यश्च Vindhya mountain also, सुमहान्नगः towering mountains, मेरुश्च Mount Meru also, भूतले on the surface of the earth, जलाशये in a pond, नागा इव like elephants, सम्प्रकाशन्ते shining.
4::61::10::तदा then, आवयोः for both of us, तीव्रः intense, स्वेदश्च sweat, खेदश्च pain, भयं च and fear, आसीत् made its appearance, मोहः confusion, दारुणा terrific, मूर्छा च and stupor, समाविशति led to.
4::61::11::याम्या दिक् southern direction, न च ज्ञायते also was not known, आग्नेयी south east, न or, वारुणी west, न or, लोकः world, युगान्ते at the end of yuga, अग्निना by fire of dissolution, दग्धः burnt, हत इव consumed, नियतः set by an order.
4::61::12::मे my, मनः mind, हतम् disturbed, चक्षुषी eyes, संश्रयम् a resort, प्राप्य became, महता with great, यत्नेन with effort, अस्मिन् in this, मनः mind, चक्षुषी both my eyes, सन्धाय by fixing, भूयः again, महता यत्नेन with great effort, भास्करः Sun, प्रतिलोकितः was seen, भास्करः Sun, पृथ्वीप्रमाणेन with the measurement of earth, तुल्यः equal, नौ to us, प्रतिभाति appeared.
4::61::13::जटायुः Jatayu, माम् to me, अनापृच्छ्य without taking leave, महीम् to the earth, निपपात fell down, ततः then, अहम् I, तम् him, दृष्ट्वा after seeing, तूर्णम् quickly, आत्मानम् myself, आकाशात् from the sky, मुक्तवान् came down. 
4::61::14::मया by me, पक्षाभ्याम् with wings, गुप्तः protected, जटायुः Jatayu, न प्रदह्यते was not burnt, तत्र there, प्रमादात् miserably, वायुपथात् from the path of the wind, पतन् while falling down, अहम्  I, निर्दग्धः got burnt.
4::61::15::तं जटायुषम् that Jatayu, जनस्थाने at Janasthana, निपतितम् fell down, आशङ्के I guess, अहं तु but I, दग्धपक्षः with burnt wings, जडीकृतः devoid of consciousness, विन्ध्ये on Vindhya, पतितः fell.
4::61::16::राज्येन with kingdom, भ्रत्रा च and brother also, पक्षाभ्याम् my wings, विक्रमेण च and my strength, हीनः devoid, सर्वथा by all means, मर्तुमेव to die, इच्छन् while desiring, गिरेः from the mountain, शिखरात् from the peak, पतिष्ये I shall fall down.  
