4::54::1::Hanuman listened to the proposal of Tara, whose face was like the Moon, lord of the stars. (After listening to Tara) he thought Angada might take over the kingdom from Sugriva.
4::54::2::Hanuman thought Vali's son possessed in addition to his intellect, eight kinds of limbs, four kinds of strength and fourteen qualities (required of a king):
4::54::3::Hanuman proceeded to win over Angada, who was ever shining in strength and valour, who was growing in majesty constantly like the Moon in the bright fornight, whose intellectual prowess was equal to that of Brhaspati, who was equal to his father in valour and who was wellversed in all sastras. Angada was listening toTara like Indra listened to Sukra (preceptor of the demons).
4::54::4::Resorting to the third strategy out of the four ways of achieving an objective Hanuman created differences among the monkeys with skilful arguments. (Sama, Dana, Bheda and Danda are the four means. Hanuman adopted Bheda as a means of winning over an enemy).
4::54::5::When there were differences among the monkeys over the issue, Hanuman intimidated Angada with frightening words expressing his anger, using skilful arguments:
4::54::6::'O Son of Tara you are, indeed, very efficient like your father in combat. You can hold firmly the responsibilty of the vanara kingdom like your father.
4::54::7::'O leader among  monkeys Vanaras are always fickleminded. Being away from their sons and wives they will not always carry out your command and stay here forever.
4::54::8::'This  I am telling you openly and frankly. These monkeys are not going to be obedient to you. Neither Jambavan, nor Nila nor the great monkey Suhotra nor even myself would subscribe to this opinion (of staying in the cave) and follow you. It is not possible for you to keep us or these monkeys from Sugriva through the policy of appeasement like Sama, Dana, Bheda or even Danda (persuasion, giving gifts, creating differences or imposing punishment).
4::54::9::'It is said that when a strong man fights a weak one, the weak opponent should adopt the strategy of asana (watching) for selfprotection. The weak should not enter into combat with the strong.
4::54::10::'You may think it safe to stay here in this opening of the earth. It is a petty task for the arrows of Lakshmana to break open this socalled cave.
4::54::11::'In the past Indra had done a small damage (to the cave) with his thunderbolt. But with his sharp arrows Lakshmana will shatter the cave easily as though it is a leaf cup. 
4::54::12::'Lakshmna has many such iron arrows that are equal to the thunderbolt. They can even split the mountains.
4::54::13::'O scorcher of enemies the moment you decide to establish yourself here, all these monkeys will surely desert you.
4::54::14::'The memory of their sons and wives will haunt these hungry monkeys. The inconvenient bed will make them so depressed that they will leave you behind.
4::54::15::'Left out of your friends and relatives,who are your wellwishers, you will be very frightened even by the trembling of a blade of grass.
4::54::16::In Progress
4::54::17::'It is not that Lakshmana's dreadful arrows flying at great speed will not torture you. It will be difficult for you to avert them as they are eager to kill an escaping enemy.
4::54::18::'If along with us you approach Sugriva in a humble manner he will make you his successor to the kingdom.
4::54::19::'Your father's brother is virtuous, wellintentioned, loving, steadfast in action, and true to his promise. He will not kill you.
4::54::20::'Your mother is his life and he would love to please her. He has no offspring other than you. Therefore, go back.'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे चतुष्पञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyfourth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
