4::44::1::Sugriva mentioned about the capacity of Hanuman, the best of monkeys as he knew he would surely succeed in accomplishing the task.
4::44::2::Sugriva, king of the monkeys, spoke, highly pleased, to Hanuman, the warrior son of the Windgod advancing towards him:
4::44::3::'O best of monkeys I scarcely see a hero comparable to your speed on earth or in space or sky or heaven or water.
4::44::4::
4::44::5::'O hero, O great monkey in movement, speed, brilliance and quickness you are similar to your mighty father, the Windgod.
4::44::6::'I do not know any living being equal to you in brilliance on this earth. Therefore, you alone know how to secure Sita.Go ahead
4::44::7::'O learned Hanuman I am of opinion that in you alone rest strength, wisdom, prowess, ability to act in accordance with time and place and knowledge of statecraft'.
4::44::8::Having understood that Hanuman was capable of accomplishing the goal, Rama started reflecting as follows:
4::44::9::'This  monkey  king, Sugriva has confidence in Hanuman that he will by all means accomplish the task.'
4::44::10::'The king Sugriva knows for sure that if Hanuman goes forth, success is assured. So he favours him.'
4::44::11::The mighty Rama was happy in his heart to see Hanuman. He felt as if the task is achieved.
4::44::12::Rama, scorcher of enemies, gladly gave Hanuman a ring inscribed with his name as a mark of identification by princess (Sita). And said:
4::44::13::'O distinguished monkey Janaka's daughter will greet you without any hesitation when you present this signet to her. She will know that you have come from me.
4::44::14::'O great hero your enterprise,  prowess coupled with courage and Sugriva's message to you seem to indicate to me about the success of your mission'.
4::44::15::The foremost among the monkeys took the ring given to him, placed it on his forehead and saluated it with folded palms. He then prostrated at the feet of Rama and departed.
4::44::16::Like the moon adorned by hosts of stars in the cloudless sky, the mighty heroic Hanuman, the great son of the Windgod, shone in the midst of the army of monkeys.
4::44::17::O Hanuman son of the Windgod, O valiant among the Vanaras, I bank on your strength. Do whatever you can with your mighty valour so that the daughter of Janaka can be found.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे चतुश्चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyfourth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
