4::26::1::Then the chiefs of the army of the monkeys surrounded  Sugriva, who was overcome with grief and was still in wet clothes (since he had taken bath at the conclusion of the funeral rites) and waited.
4::26::2::Just like sages stand before the creator Brahma, all the monkeys stood with folded hands before the longarmed Rama, the remover of sorrow. 
4::26::3::Hanuman, son of the Windgod, glowing like a golden mountain, whose face resembled the rising Sun addressed Rama with folded hands:
4::26::4::'O Lord by your grace Sugriva inherited the ancestral kingdom which would have been otherwise difficult.
4::26::5::'Permitted by your gracious self, he will enter the auspicious city along with his friends and perform his duties. He had his auspicious bath in fragrant waters with medicinal herbs as per tradition. 
4::26::6::'He wants to propitiate you first specially with garlands and  gems. Pray enter this beautiful mountain cave for the pleasure of the monkeys and establish relationship with king Sugriva.'
4::26::7::Requested by Hanuman who was skilful in conversation, wise Rama, slayer of enemies, replied:
4::26::8::'Dear Hanuman In obedience to my father's command I should not enter any village or city for fourteen years.
4::26::9::'Let Sugriva enter the beautiful prosperous cavern (Kishkinda) and be installed by you as king with due rituals.'
4::26::10::Having thus spoken to Hanuman, Rama who knew etiquette addressed mighty  Sugriva, endowed with wisdom:
4::26::11::'O hero consecrate Angada as heirapparent since he deserves it as the eldest son of your brother, a noble soul and equal to you in prowess. 
4::26::12::'O noble Sugriva the four months from now will be rainy season. This is Sravana, the first month of the season in which rain is expected to start pouring.
4::26::13::'O goodnatured Sugriva this is not a suitable time for any endeavour. Go to the auspicious capital city of Kishkinda and I will reside on the mountain with Lakshmana.
4::26::14::'Dear Sugriva this cavern of the mountain is large and airy. It has abundant water resources with lotuses and lilies. 
4::26::15::'Enter the city and get yourself installed and cheer your friends. Make all arrangement for killing Ravana when the month of Kartika begins as it is the proper time (for the purpose).
4::26::16::Thus permitted by Rama , Sugriva, lord of the monkeys entered the beautiful city of Kishkinda (once) ruled by Vali.
4::26::17::Thousands of monkeys entered the city of Kishkinda along with their king, and stood  in attendance everywhere.
4::26::18::Then all the subjects of the city collected together, prostrated to the chief of the monkey clan with their forehead touching the ground (as a mark of respect) and sat down.
4::26::19::Asking the monkeys to rise to their feet, the mighty and powerful Sugriva entered the inner chambers of his brother.
4::26::20::With Sugriva,the lord of the monkeys, returned to Kishkinda, his kith and kin  coronated him just as the gods consecrated the thousandeyed Indra. 
4::26::21::The monkeys brought a white canopy decorated with gold and two chamaras with glorious golden staff. They also brought jewels, all kinds of medicinal herbs, sprouts, sap from trees, white flowers and white clothes, unguents, garlands of fragrant lotuses that grow on land and water, heavently sandal, fragrants of different kinds, goldcoloured paddy, honey of priyanga, curds, tiger skin and sandals made of boar skin. Then sixteen beautiful, cheerful females appeared with unguent, gorochana mixed with red arsenic (used for putting tilaka on the forehead).
4::26::22::Then they duly propitiated the brahmins, offering them gifts of gems, clothes and eatables.
4::26::23::Then the priests (people who recite Vedic hymns) strew around kusa grass, kindled sacred fire with recitation of mantras and made offerings of havis into the fire.
4::26::24::Then Sugriva was seated facing the east on a golden throne with fine coverings on top of the mansion decorated with multicoloured garlands. As per tradition, sacred waters  collected from rivers and rivulets and stored in golden pots was aportioned in accordance with the procedure ordained by the sages in sastras. At the appropriate time the pure and fragrant water was poured by Gaja, Gavaya, Sarabha, Mainda, Dvivida, Hanumanta, Jambavan and Nala on Sugriva, the bull among monkeys through horns of bulls and jars of gold, like the eight Vasus bathed the thousandeyed Indra. Thus they performed the consecration.
4::26::25::As Sugriva was ceremoniously consecrated, thousands of monkeys rejoiced and shrieked out of joy.
4::26::26::In obedience to Rama's instruction, Sugriva, lord of the monkeys installed Angada as prince regent and embraced him.
4::26::27::The great monkeys concerned hailed Sugriva's action  saying, 'well done, well done' on the installation of Angada.
4::26::28::As Sugriva and Angada were installed, all the monkeys were highly pleased and praised the noblehearted Rama and Lakshmana again and again.
4::26::29::The beautiful city of Kishkinda situated in a mountaincave, decorated with banners and flags was filled with happy, wellfed citizens.
4::26::30::The valiant leader of the monkey army (Sugriva) reported to great Rama about the installation.Having secured the kingdom and his wife Ruma, Sugriva also felt like Indra (who secured the kingdom of gods).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्थाकाण्डे षड्विंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentysixth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic, composed by sage Valmiki.
