4::20::1::Beholding her husband lying on the ground pierced by a deathdealing arrow released by Rama, the lovely moonfaced Tara went and embraced him. 
4::20::2::Beholding Vali, the lord of monkeys, who was strong as an elephant, splendid as a mountain, fallen down like an uprooted tree, struck by the arrow, Tara became restless and wailed bitterly:
4::20::3::'O valiant hero, lord of monkeys you were terrifying in war. Why don't you speak now to me so forlorn and helpless?
4::20::4::'O tiger among monkeys get up. Come and sleep on the best of beds. Best of kings, you should not lie on the ground.
4::20::5::'O lord of the earth I know you loved the earth more than you loved me since you have forsaken me and enjoy her company by hugging her with your limbs, even after death.
4::20::6::'O my heroic husband, you are the legitimate, righteous king of Kiskinda. You have evidently built another beautiful city Kiskinda on your way to heaven.
4::20::7::'Our pleasure trips to sweetscented forests have ended now. You have brought them to a close.
4::20::8::'You are the leader of leaders. Now that you have attained heaven I am bereft of all joy,   plunged in a sea of grief.
4::20::9::'I presume my heart is strong, for it has not broken into a thousand pieces, even though I am overwhelmed with grief to see my husband fallen on the ground.
4::20::10::'O king of monkeys you have banished Sugriva. You have usurped his wife. This is the fruit  of your action.
4::20::11:: 'O lord of monkeys wishing your wellbeing I tendered salutary advice. But out of delusion you despised them.
4::20::12::'O venerable one you will surely churn the minds of the kindhearted celestial nymphs who are endowed with youth and beauty.
4::20::13:: 'No doubt time is inexorable. The time of your death had surely arrived.Now you, whom nobody could control, have come under the sway of Sugriva.
4::20::14::'I have not experienced poverty or suffering before. Immersed in grief, like an orphan, now I am reduced to the pitiable condition of a widow.
4::20::15::'To what plight will the tender Angada, who has been tended affectionately and deserves comforts, be reduced when his uncle displays anger?
4::20::16::(Turning to Angada Tara said) 'O son, look at your father, a lover of dharma. See him, as it will be difficult to see him later, dear'.
4::20::17::'O lord you have set out on a long journey. Kiss your son on the forehead, enjoy its sweet smell, console him and give him your message.
4::20::18::'Indeed, Rama has achieved a great feat in fulfilling his promise to Sugriva. He is acquitted of the debt by killing you. 
4::20::19::'(Now turning to Sugriva she said) O Sugriva your enemy brother has been killed and your desire has been fulfilled.You will get back Ruma and enjoy the kingdom without any obstacles.'
4::20::20::'(To Vali she said) O lord of monkeys Why don't you speak to me loving words when I am wailing this way? Here are your excellent wives'
4::20::21::On hearing the wailing of Tara, all the other wives of Vali held the piteous (in their arms) Angada and wailed, overwhelmed with sorrow:
4::20::22::'O hero, adorned with armlets, why have you departed on a long journey, deserting your dear son Angada who possesses similar virtues like you? It is not proper.
4::20::23::'O darling, attractively dressed, you are leaving me and Angada and going too far.  What unpleasant deeds we have done (to deserve this).
4::20::24::'O longarmed chief of the monkey clan O warrior pardon me any wrong done unknowingly, inconsiderately. I touch your feet with my head.'
4::20::25::Beautiful Tara crying pathetically sat near her husband along with other female monkeys on the ground, determined to abstain from food and drink, awaiting death.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे विंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends  the twentieth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
