4::61::1::'Then I revealed everything to the sage,including the arrogant, impetuous action of rashly following the Sun (for challenging Indra).
4::61::2::'O revered sage I am exhausted and my senses are depressed. I am ashamed of myself. My body is wounded. Therefore I am not able to reply.
4::61::3::'Deluded by pride, I and my brother Jatayu challenging each other to test our relative strength flew  far into the sky.
4::61::4::'Both of us made a bet on the peak of mount Kailasa in the presence of sages to follow the Sungod until he sets on the western mountain.
4::61::5::
4::61::6::'We heard at some places sounds of musical instruments, sounds of Vedic chanting, and many lovely young women dressed in redsinging.
4::61::7::'We flew quickly into the sky and reached the path of the Sun and looked down at the forest which looked like a green lawn.
4::61::8::'The earth filled with lofty mountains appeared as if it is covered with pebbles. Surrounded by rivers meandering, it looked as though it was entwined with threads.
4::61::9::'The mountains of the earth, Himavan and Vindhya and the great Meru looked like huge elephants in a huge pond.
4::61::10::'Much sweat, pain and fear generated in us while we went on and up. This led to terrific confusion and stupor.
4::61::11::'I did not know which the southern direction was or the southeast or the west. It looked as if the world had been consumed by fire and dissolved, as if it was the end of the yuga.
4::61::12::'My mind was disturbed and I turned my attention from the object. Once again I focused my attention (on the Sun) and could see the Sungod with great effort. The Sun appeared to us equal in size to earth.
4::61::13::'Without taking leave of me Jatayu descended down to the earth. Seeing that, I also followed him down quickly from the sky.
4::61::14::'I protected Jatayu with my wings so that he was not burnt. I, however, got burnt miserably and fell down from the aerial region.
4::61::15::'I thought Jatayu had fallen down somewhere at Janasthana, but I fell on Vindhya, wings burnt, in an unconscious state.
4::61::16::'Bereft of my kingdom, my brother and my wings, and having lost my strength I desire to fall down from the mountain top and die.'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyfirst sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
