4::23::1::ततः then, लोकाच्च्युतं  departed from the world, तारा Tara, कपिराजस्य  king of monkeys', तत् मुखम् his forehead, समुपजिघ्रन्ती smelt (kissed), मृतम् dead, पतिम् husband, वचनम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
4::23::2::वीर hero, मम my,वचनम् words, अकृत्वा not cared, त्वम् you, विषमे on a hard, उपलोपचिते carpeted with stones, सुदुःखे very painful, वसुधातले on the ground, दुःखम् sadly, शेषे  lying  
4::23::3::वानरेन्द्र O lord of monkeys, मही the earth, तव to you, मत्तः more than me, नूनम् surely, प्रियतरा dearer, हि indeed, ताम् to her, परिष्वज्य embracing, शेषे in the end, माम् me, न प्रतिभाषसे च  not replying me.
4::23::4::वीर hero, साहसिकप्रिय one who determined and brave, सुग्रीवस्य Sugriva's, वशं प्राप्तः you have lost to, सुग्रीव एव only Sugriva, विक्रान्तः valiant, एषः that way, विधिः fate, भवति declared, अहो Oh
4::23::5::ऋक्षवानरमुख्याः leader of bears and monkeys, बलिनः powerful, त्वाम् your, पर्युपासते are standing near,एषाम् of these, कृच्छ्रम् entire, विलपितम् wailing, शोचतः crying in grief, अङ्गदस्य च Angada's, मम my, इमाः these, गिरः words,  श्रुत्वा on hearing, त्वम् you, किम् why, न प्रतिबुध्यसे you are not getting up.
4::23::6::त्वयैव by yourself, पुरा earlier, निहताः killed, रिपवः enemies, यत्र there, शायिताः they are made to lie down, तत् that, शूरशयनम् the reclining place for heroes, इदम् this, युधि in war, हतः killed, यत्र where, (तत्र there), शेषे you are lying.
4::23::7::विशुद्धसत्त्वाभिजन born into pure and noble clan, प्रिययुद्ध O lover of battle, मानद O venerable one, मम प्रिय my dear, त्वम् you, अनाथाम् an orphan, माम् me, एकाम् विहाय leaving me alone, गतः went.
4::23::8::विपश्चिता by wise men, कन्या a girl, शूराय for a warrior, न प्रदातव्या should not be given in marriage, सद्यः presently, विधवां कृताम्  rendered a widow, हताम् killed, शूरभार्याम् wife of a warrior, माम् me, पश्य you may see.
4::23::9::मे my, मानः pride, अवभग्नश्च  is crushed, मे my, शाश्वती गतिः ultimate resort, भग्ना is shattered, अगाधे in a bottomless, विपुले in a vast, शोकसागरे in ocean of sorrow, निमग्ना plunged, अस्मि I am.
4::23::10::निहतम्  killed, भर्तारम् husband, दृष्ट्वा  seeing, यत् since, अद्य now, शतधा into a hundred, न कृतम् not broken, मे my, दृढम् hard, इदं हृदयम् this heart, अश्मसारमयम् made of stone, नूनम् surely.
4::23::11::मम my, प्रकृत्या by nature, प्रियः dear, सुहृच्छैव a friend also, भर्ता च and husband, आहवे in  battle, पराक्रान्तः a powerful, शूरः hero, पञ्चत्वम् death, आगतः reached.
4::23::12::या नारी any woman, पतिहीना without husband, पुत्रिणी mother of sons, भवतु कामम् even so, धनधान्यैस्सुपूर्णाऽपि a prosperous lady with wealth and grain in abundance, बुधैः by learned people, विधवेति only a widow, उच्यते is called so.
4::23::13::वीर O hero, स्वगात्रप्रभवे flowing from your body, रुधिरमण्डले in a pool of blood, क्रिमिरागपरिस्तोमे  crimson bed, त्वमात्मशयने in sleeping, यथा as such, शेषे you are lying.
4::23::14::प्लवगर्षभ O bull among monkeys, समन्ततः all over, रेणुशोणितसंवीतम् covered with dust particles and blood, तव गात्रम् your body, भुजाभ्याम् with my arms, परिरब्धुम् to embrace, न शक्नोमि not able to. 
4::23::15::अतिदारुणे very dreadful, अस्मिन् वैरे his enmity, सुग्रीवः Sugriva, अद्य now, कृतकृत्यः has achieved his goal, यस्य at whose, भयम् fear, रामविमुक्तेन released by Rama, एकेषुणा one single arrow, हृतम् is dispelled.
4::23::16::त्वयि your, पञ्चत्वम् death, आगते reached, हृदि in the chest,  शरेण by the arrow,  लग्नेन by  arrow pierced, गात्रसंस्पर्शने touching limbs, वार्यामि refrain from, त्वां your, निरीक्षन्ती only looking at you.
4::23::17::तदा then, नीलः Nila, तस्य his, गात्रगतम् deadbody, शरम् arrow, गिरिगह्वरसंलीनम् hidden in the mountain cave(heart), दीप्तम् glowing, आशीविषं यथा like a serpent, उद्ववर्ह made effort.
4::23::18::निष्कृषमाणस्य as it was being pulled out, तस्य of that, बाणस्य arrow's, द्युतिः glow, दिनकरात् Sun's, अस्तमस्तकसंरुद्धः obstructed by the peak of the western mountain, रश्मिः इव like the rays, बभौ appeared.
4::23::19::तस्य from his, व्रणेभ्यः wound, क्षतजधाराः streams of blood, धराधरात् from a mountain, ताम्रगैरिकसम्पृक्ताः red mixed with copper, धाराः इव like the streams, सर्वशः all over, पेतुः flowed.
4::23::20::रणरेणुना wardust, अवकीर्णम् covered, भर्तारम् husband, विमार्जन्ती wiped, अस्त्रसमाहतम्  wounded with the weapon, शूरम् warrior, नयनजैः water from the eyes, अप्रैः with tears, सिषेच sprinkled.
4::23::21::अङ्गना woman, तारा Tara, विनिहतम् killed, रुधिरोक्षितसर्वाङ्गम्  all parts of his body drenched in blood, पतिम् husband, दृष्ट्वा seeing, पुत्रम् son, पिङ्गाक्षम् tawnyeyed, अङ्गदम् Angada, उवाच said.
4::23::22::पुत्र Son, पितुः of father, सुदारुणाम् most terrific, पश्चिमां at the end, अवस्थाम् condition, पश्य  see, पापकर्मणा on account of the sinful deeds, सम्प्रसक्तस्य that which was forced on him, वैरस्य out of the enmity, अन्तः end, गतः reached.
4::23::23::पुत्र son, बालसूर्योदयतनुम्  body (red) like the rising Sun, यमसदनम् abode of Yama, प्रयान्तम् departing , राजानम् king, मानदम् venerable, पितरम् father, अभिवादय offer salutations.
4::23::24::एवम् that way, उक्तः  advised, समुत्थाय  got up, अहम् I am, अङ्गदः Angada, इति thus, ब्रुवन् speaking, पीनवृत्ताभ्याम् stout, भुजाभ्याम् both shoulders, पितुः of father, चरणौ feet, जग्राह clasped.
4::23::25::त्वाम् to you, अभिवादयमानम् saluting, अङ्गदम् Angada, त्वम् you, पुत्र son, दीर्घायुः longlived, भव be, इति thus, किमर्थं why, यथा पुरा like earlier, नाभिभाषसे not speaking?
4::23::26::सद्यः now, सिंहेन by a lion, निहतम् struck, गोवृषम् mighty bull, सवत्सा along with her calf, गौः इव like a calf, पुत्रसहाया wait upon with son, अहम् I am, गतचेतसम् lost consciousness (died), त्वाम् you, उपासे I serve you.
4::23::27::सङ्ग्रामयज्ञेन इष्ट्वा having performed a sacrificial war, पत्न्या with wife, मया विना without me, रामप्रह्ररणाम्भसि in the water of Rama's arrow, अस्मिन् in this, अवभृथे in this bath taken at the end of a sacrifice, कथम् how, स्नातः did you bathe?
4::23::28::संयुगे in the battle, तुष्टेन  pleased, देवराजेन by the king of gods (Indra), या such one, तव to your, दत्ता gifted, ताम् that one, शातकुम्भमयीं a golden one, मालाम् necklace, इह now, किम् why, न पश्यामि I do not see.
4::23::29::मानद venerable, शैलराजम् king of mountains, आवर्तमानस्य as he returns, सूर्यस्य the Sun's, प्रभा इव like light, राज्यश्रीः kingly glory, गतासुम् अपि even though departed, त्वाम् you, न जहाति not left.
4::23::30::त्वया by you, मे mine, पथ्यम् proper, इदं वचः these words, न कृतम् not followed, तव your, निवारणे in preventing, शक्ता capable, न अस्मि च हि I was not, संयुगे in war, हतेन one who is killed, सुपुत्रा along with my son, हतास्मि I am dead, श्रीः goddess of fortune, त्वया सह along with you, मामिह from me, विजहाति has deserted.
