4::34::1:: On seeing the angry Lakshmana, a bull among men, who could not be obstructed,  enter in,  Sugriva was disturbed. 
4::34::2::Seeing enraged Lakshmana, son of Dasaratha, sighing heavily, glowing like bright fire burning with the sorrow of Rama, Sugriva jumped out of his seat quitting the decorated golden throne just as Indra's decorated banner is raised up suddenly.
4::34::3:: As soon as Sugriva jumped up ,Ruma and other womenfolk rose to their feet like the clusters of stars around the fullMoon in the sky.
4::34::4::With eyes red as blood through drunkenness,prosperous Sugriva was shaken like the Kalpa tree.He stood there and offered salutations(to Lakshmana) with folded hands.
4::34::5::Looking at Sugriva surrounded by Ruma and other women like the Moon among stars, infuriated Lakshmana said
4::34::6::'Only a king who is an heir to a noble family, compassionate, and selfcontrolled, grateful and truthful excels in the world.
4::34::7::'Which king can be more malicious than the one who makes false promises and adopts an unrighteous path towards those who helped him?
4::34::8::'If a man tells a lie about a horse, he commits the sin of killing a hundred horses. If one tells a lie about a cow, he shares the sin of killing a thousand cows. If one tells a lie about a man, it is equal to the sin of killing oneself and his own people.
4::34::9::'O lord of monkeys he who, having accomplished his task first with the help of his friend, does not return the help is ungrateful. Such a person deserves to be killed.It applies to all beings.
4::34::10::'O lord of the monkeys here is a verse worthy of appreciation by all the worlds, sung by a brahmin, when he saw an ungrateful person. Listen:
4::34::11::'There is expiation for one who kills a brahmin, a drunkard, a thief and a violator of sacred vows. But there is no atonement for an ungrateful man.'
4::34::12::'O monkey you have already achieved your objective (with the help of Rama) but have not helped Rama in return. You are surely an ignoble and ungrateful liar.
4::34::13::'O monkey, if you are grateful to Rama you should wish to search for Sita. Indeed, you should make efforts to take it up.
4::34::14::'You have failed to keep your word. You are engaged in worldly pleasures. Rama did not know that you are a serpent croaking like a frog.
4::34::15::'Rama is illustrious, compassionate and great. He has granted the kingdom to you, to one who is a sinner and an evilminded person.
4::34::16::'If you do not recognise  the help of Rama who can accomplish any deed with ease, you will be killed with my sharp arrows and meet Vali (in heaven).
4::34::17::'O Sugriva the path by which Vali went is not closed.I wish you do not follow him. You stand by the promise made. 
4::34::18::'You have not seen the thunderboltlike arrows released from the bow of Rama, the renowned prince of the Ikshvaku race. Therefore you are resorting to enjoyment without any fear and have not given thought to Rama's work.'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे चतुस्त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyfourth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
