4::55::1::On hearing Hanuman's humble words (of advice) consistent with righteousness and full of devotion to his master, the king, Angada said:
4::55::2::'Sugriva has no steadfastness, purity of body and mind, compassion, rectitude, valour and patience.
4::55::3:: 'He usurped his elder brother's queen, while he was still alive. It is morally abominable since an elder brother's wife is like a mother. How can a person who blocks the entrance of a cave while his noble brother is engaged in fighting inside be treated as righteous?
4::55::4::'Illustrious Rama, who faithfully held his hand was forgotten after he received his help. Indeed whose help would he remember?
4::55::5::'Sugriva ordered search for Sita out of fear of Lakshmana and not out of fear of unrighteousness. How can such a man be pious?
4::55::6::'He is a sinner and an ungrateful person as he does not remember others' help. He is fickleminded. Which respectable person will believe him? Which member of his family will wish to live?
4::55::7::'If I am the king's son, virtuous or otherwise, I will be installed in the kingdom (as successor). How can Sugriva suffer me to live when I am his enemy's descendant?
4::55::8::'My alternate strategy has failed. I have already made a mistake (by announcing my plan). My advisors are holding different views. I am powerless. How can a weakling, an orphan like me live in Kishkinda?
4::55::9::'Sugriva is deceitful, cruel and treacherous. He will inflict secret punishment on me by way of imprisonment for the sake of the kingdom.
4::55::10::'It is better for me to fast unto death rather than suffer imprisonment. Permit me to do so. You may all go back.
4::55::11::'I swear I will not return to the city. I will fast unto death here only. Death for me is desirable.
4::55::12::'Convey my greetings with due courtesy to Rama and Lakshmana on my behalf and my respects to my father's younger brother, king of monkeys, Sugriva and wish him well.
4::55::13::'You should convey my mother as well as Ruma my good wishes for their health and wellbeing. You should console my mother Tara also.
4::55::14::'By nature my mother, is compassionate. She is fond of me. (But) she is helpless. On hearing about my death, she will certainly give up her life'.
4::55::15::Having expresed so much of his feelings, disheartened Angada saluted the elderly monkeys and started crying. Then he spread the darbha grass and lay down on the ground.
4::55::16::Seeing him lie down the bulls among the monkeys became sad and shed hot tears from their eyes.
4::55::17::Blaming Sugriva and praising Vali, all the companions of Angada sat there surrounding him after having decided to fast unto death . 
4::55::18::With the opinion of Vali's son ascertained, all the great monkeys thought it proper to die. They sipped water and assembled on the northern shore of the sea facing the east with the darbha grass spread on the ground, their edges pointing southward.
4::55::19::Overtaken by the fear of death, the monkeys kept talking about Rama's exile into the forest, Dasaratha's death, destruction of demons in Janasthana, the death of Jatayu, abduction of Sita, Vali's death and Rama's anger. 
4::55::20::While the numerous monkeys, resembling peaks of high mountains were roaring, it resounded through the mountain caves. It was like the sound of the  stormy thunderclouds.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे पञ्चपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyfifth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
