4::21::1::ततः then, अम्बरात् from the sky, च्युताम् fallen down, तारामिव like a star, निपतिताम् fallen on the ground, ताराम् Tara, हरियूथपः leader of the monkey clan, हनुमान् Hanuman, शनैः slowly, आश्वासयामास consoled.
4::21::2::जन्तुः an embodied soul, गुणदोषकृतम् by virtue of their good and bad deeds, फलहेतुकम् the fruits of actions, सर्वम् all, तत् that, शुभाशुभम् whether good and bad, कर्म deed, प्रेत्य after death, अव्यग्रः gradually, आप्नोति attains.
4::21::3::शोच्या worry, शोच्यम् a matter to grieve, कम् whom, शोचसि you are grieving, दीना in a  miserable manner, अनुकम्पसे you show sympathy, अस्मिन् in this, देहे body, बुद्बुदोपमे like a bubble, कः who, कस्य for whom, अनुशोच्यः worthy of worrying, अस्ति now.
4::21::4::जीवपुत्रया  who has a son surviving, कुमारः prince, अयम् this, अङ्गदः Angada, द्रष्टव्यः should be looked after, आयत्याम् in future, अस्य his, विधेयानि duties, समर्थानि properly, चिन्तय you may think of.
4::21::5::भूतानाम् for all beings, आगतिम् transient happenings, अनियताम् एव as it is unstable, जानासि you know, तस्मात् therefore, पण्डितेन by the wise, इह here, लौकिकम् worldly, शुभम् auspicious, कर्तव्यं हि is to be done.
4::21::6::यस्मिन् in whom, कृतांशानि pinning their hopes, हरिसहस्राणि thousands of monkeys, प्रयुतानि in millions, अर्बुदानि च and tens of millions, वर्तयन्ति sustain, सः he, अयम् this, दिष्टान्तम् to enjoy the fruits of his good deeds, आगतः reached.
4::21::7::न्यायदृष्टार्थः who has right vision, सामदानक्षमापरः adopts the sama(conciliation) dana (charity) and forgiveness (as means of administration), अयम् this hero, यत् such, धर्मजिताम् of those who win righteously, भूमिम् earth, गतः reached, एवम् in that way, शोचितुम् to mourn, नार्हसि not proper.
4::21::8::अनिन्दिते O blemishless lady, सर्वे all, हरिशार्दूलाः tigers among monkeys, तव your, पुत्रः son, अयम् this, अङ्गदश्च Angada's, हर्यृक्षपतिराज्यं च and the kingdom of monkeys and bears, त्वत्सनाथम्  under your protection.
4::21::9::भामिनि O fair sex, शोकसन्तप्तौ immersed in grief, तौ इमौ they both, शनैः slowly, प्रेरय you may encourage, त्वया by you, परिगृहीतः protected, अयम् this, अङ्गदः Angada, मेदिनीम् earth, शास्तु he may command.
4::21::10::सन्ततिः a son, यथा that way, दृष्टा after seeing, साम्प्रतम् presently, राज्ञः to king Vali, यत् all such thing, कृत्यं चापि and done, तत् that, सर्वम् all, क्रियताम् may be carried out, एषः this, कालस्य at this time, निश्चयः is the decision.
4::21::11::हरिराजः king of monkeys, संस्कार्यः all rituals should be performed, अङ्गदश्च by Angada, अभिषिच्यताम् may be consecrated, सिंहासनगतम् seated on the throne, पुत्रम् son, पश्यन्ती while you are looking at him, शान्तिम् peace, एष्यसि you will attain.
4::21::12::भर्तृव्यसनपीडिता tormented by the husband's death, सा तारा that Tara, तस्य his, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा on hearing, अवस्थितम् waiting, हनूमन्तम् to Hanumanta, अवस्थितम् who was waiting, उत्तरम् reply, अब्रवीत् said.
4::21::13::अङ्गदप्रतिरूपाणाम् of those who may be prototypes of Angada, पुत्राणाम् of sons, शतम् one hundred, एकतः on one side, हतस्यापि even if he is slayed, अस्य his, वीरस्य warrior's, गात्रसंश्लेषणम् embracing the body, वरम् is better.
4::21::14::अहम् I am, हरिराजस्य of the king of monkeys, अङ्गदस्य वा or about Angada, न प्रभवामि not the right, तस्य his, पितृव्यः father's brother, सर्वकार्येषु in all tasks, अनन्तरः herafter.
4::21::15::हनुमान् O Hanuman, अङ्गदं प्रति for Angada, एषा that way, बुद्धि: thought, न आस्थेयाः not to be entertained, हरिसत्तम best of monkeys, पुत्रस्य son's, पिता father, बन्धुः relation, माता mother, न none else.
4::21::16::मम my, इह वा in this world or, परत्र वा or in the next world, हरिराजसंश्रयात् other than joining king of monkeys, क्षमतरम् a safer course, न अस्ति हि is not found, अभिमुखहतवीरसेवितम् used by this slain warrior in front of me, इदं this, शयनम् resting place, सेवितुम् to rest, मम for me, क्षमम् is fitting.
