4::43::1::Sugriva, the bull among monkeys, having sent his fatherinlaw in the western direction, said to Satavali, troop leader of the monkeys:
4::43::2::'Righteous king Sugriva said to the foremost among the monkeys, Satavali what would help his cause as well as the cause of Rama:
4::43::3::'Take like you a hundred thousand courageous heroes, your ministers and the sons of Vaivasvata. And begin your expedition.
4::43::4::'Look all over the northern direction adorned with mighty Himavan as its earring, for the spouse of blameless Rama 
4::43::5::'We should be succeessful in our endeavour when we have completed the task dear to Rama. We will be redeemed of our debt to him. 
4::43::6:: 'Highsouled Rama has done a great service to us earlier. We will be blessed if we are successful in helping Rama in return. 
4::43::7:: 'Our life becomes fruitful when we help a person who was not helped us. What to speak of returning the help one has rendered.
4::43::8::'Keeping this in mind, you, as my wellwishers, should act in a way Janaki can be traced.
4::43::9::'This Rama who can conquer the capitals of enemies is great. He loves and is loved by all living beings including ourselves.
4::43::10::'You are rich in wisdom and valour. You should search for Sita everywhere including inaccessible forests and mountain ranges.
4::43::11::'Search in the countries of Mlechas, Pulindas, Surasenas, Prasthalas, Bharatas, Madrakas, Kurus, Kambojas and even Yavanas, Shakas, Rattakas, Bahlikas, Rishikas, Pauravas, Tankanas, Cheenas, Paramacheenas, Niharas, Daradas and in the Himalaya mountains again and again in order to find her.
4::43::12::'There you should explore the dwelling of Ravana and Vaidehi, in the thickets of lodhra and lotuses and in the woods of devadaru.
4::43::13::'Then go and explore the hermitage of Soma inhabited by gods and gandharvas and also the great summits of mount Kala.
4::43::14::'Look for that great lady, Rama's consort, in the big caves and caverns all over the mountain.
4::43::15::'Crossing this lord of hills filled with gold, you should reach the great mountain called Sudarsana.
4::43::16::'Then proceed to mount Devasakha inhabited by a variety of birds adorning the trees.
4::43::17::'You should search for Ravana as well as Vaidehi everywhere in the thickets of that hill, near the mountain streams and also in caves.
4::43::18::'Beyond, there is a desolate place of hundred yojanas with no trace of life, no mountains, no trees, no rivers.
4::43::19::'Crossing that horripilating, desolate place quickly, you will be happy to reach the snowy Kailasa mountain.
4::43::20::'There is an exquisite mansion of Kubera built by Visvakarma which, embellished with gold, looks like a pale white cloud.
4::43::21::'There is a large lotus pond with many lotuses and lilies, inhabited by swans and ducks and frequented by groups of apasaras. 
4::43::22::'Kubera, son of Vaisravana, a prosperous king of the yakshas (demigods) worshipped by all beings dwells there with Guhyakas. 
4::43::23::'Look for Vaidehi and Ravana all over the caves and mountains of Kilasa of the colour of the moon.
4::43::24::'Therefrom proceed to mount krauncha mountain and enter carefully its cave which is reportedly difficult to access.
4::43::25::'Great ascetics live there. Worshipped even by the gods, these highsouled godlike ascetics shine like the very Sun.
4::43::26:: 'Ransack the peaks of Krauncha, its caves, caverns and ridges.
4::43::27::'There is a mountain region known as Kama, and Manasa where there are no trees. It is a bird sanctuary. Not only living beings, even gods, demons and rakshas have no access to that place.
4::43::28::'Beyond mount Krauncha you will find Mainaka. All of you should search for Sita in the plain lands and the ridges of the mountain.
4::43::29::'There on Mainaka a demon, called Maya has built a mansion all by himself. Try to look in the plain lands, ridges and deep caves of Mainaka and in the residences of kinnera women with faces of horses.  
4::43::30::'On passing that place, you will come across a hermitage inhabited by siddhas and ascetics, Vaikhanasas and Valakilyas.
4::43::31::'They deserve  your reverence since they are accomplished ascetics.They are cleansed of sins by their penance.You should be polite when you ask them for information  about Sita. 
4::43::32::
4::43::33::
4::43::34::'If you cross that region, you will find no Sun, no Moon, no stars, no cloud, no sound.
4::43::35::'That (Sunless) land shines like the radiance of the Sungod with the presence of selfeffulgent ascetics who have attained perfection in penance.
4::43::36::'Passing that region you will reach a mountain stream called Sailoda. On both the banks of the stream are bamboo groves called Kichakas. They waft the siddhas to and from the river. (Kichakas bend forward forming an arch and thus help sages to cross the river.)
4::43::37::'Thereafter you will reach the country of UttaraKuru, a resort for those who have done meritorious deeds.There are lotus ponds with golden lotuses with bluish and greenish leaves.There are thousands of rivers adorned with red and night lotuses of gold.
4::43::38::'There are tanks and lakes filled with lotuses shining like the rising Sun with lotus leaves having the colour of precious emeralds. The lotus filaments look like golden threads. The entire place is full of blue lotus groves, exquisite pearls and other gems.
4::43::39::'There the sandy river banks are rich with all kinds of colourful gems resplendent with the brightness of gold. Gold and gems glowing like fire in the best of mountains have entered these rivers.
4::43::40::'There the trees are filled with flowers and fruits in all seasons. Birds rest on them.  By their excellent fragrance, taste and smooth feel the fruits and flowers satisfy the desires of all. Some other excellent trees provide barks of various kinds which are used for cloth.
4::43::41::'Some other great trees (of the region) provide ornaments suitable for both men and women studded with precious pearls and vaidurya which give pleasure in all seasons.  Other trees put forth beautiful and highly valuable ornaments.
4::43::42::'The trees of that region deliver beds with colourful spreads. Some trees yield garlands of flowers pleasing to the heart.
4::43::43::'Some trees bring forth many  good quality drinks, eatables and also virtuous  women, young and beautiful.
4::43::44::There gandharvas, kinneras, siddhas, nagas and vidyadharas, radiant like the Sun, are seen sporting with their female companions. 
4::43::45::'By virtue of their meritorious deeds (done in the previous birth) they live a luxurious life of riches and sensual pleasures with their female partners.
4::43::46::'Pleasing sounds of heavenly musicvocal and instrumental and laughter of celestial beings are ever heard in that region. 
4::43::47::'There nobody is unhappy or inclined towards evil deeds and virtues in people go increasing day by day.
4::43::48::'Cross it and, you will reach the northern sea. In its midst is the great golden mountain, Somagiri. 
4::43::49::'Only those who have reached the world of Indra and Brahma in heaven can see that  king of mountains.
4::43::50::'That place gets light and heat even though there is no Sun.
4::43::51::'Even divine beings, the elevenfold Samhbu, the allpervading Visnu and Lord Brahma surrounded by Brahmarshis (divine seers) reside there.
4::43::52::'You should not go beyond the north of Kuru. No living being can trespass it.
4::43::53::'It is difficult even for gods to reach Somagiri. You should return immediately after seeing that mountain.
4::43::54::'O monkey leaders it is not possible for monkeys to go beyond. The Sun does not shine beyond that place and it is not visible. We do not know what lies beyond that (Somagiri). 
4::43::55::'You should keep in mind the places described. You may also think of other places I might have omitted.
4::43::56::'O heroic monkeys comparable to fire If you are successful in finding Vaidehi you will be carrying out your duty.  Rama will be highly pleased by your action. My pleasure will be even greater.
4::43::57::'O monkeys, when you have accomplished your goal, you will be honoured by me as though you have returned after scoring a victory over the enemy. You will roam this earth with your relatives, rejoicing in the company of your loved ones.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे त्रिचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends of fortythird sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
