4::6::1::Sugriva was pleased to say to Rama, delight of the Raghu race once again, 'O Rama, Hanuman, jewel among Ministers, has told me the cause of your coming to this desolate forest. While you were residing in the forest, a demon who was looking for an opportunity carried off your wife, the princess from Mithila, daughter of Janaka, finding her alone. While she was crying (piteously) he killed Jatayu. (the vulture who pretested).
4::6::2::'Very soon you will be relieved of the grief caused by the separation from your wife. Just as Visnu retrieved the Vedas (carried away by the demons, Madhu and Kaitabha) I will deliver her to you.
4::6::3::'O subduer of enemies I will restore her to you even if she is kept in the bowels of the earth or in the vaults of heaven. 
4::6::4::'O longarmed Rama, take these words of mine as true. Your consort cannot be absorbed with impunity even by the denizens of heaven including Indra or the ogres on earth any more than food cooked with poison.Give up grief.
4::6::5::'Yes, I remember. I had observed a lady being carried away by a wicked demon. She was crying loudly 'Oh, Rama Oh Rama Oh Lakshmana' in a husky voice. It was Maithili. She was wriggling on the lap of Ravana like a female serpent.
4::6::6::'Seeing me as the fifth member seated on a mountain  she dropped down the auspicious ornaments (bundled) in her veil 
4::6::7::'Rama, we have kept  them safely. I will fetch them so that you should be able to identify them.'
4::6::8::Rama then said to Sugriva, one who used pleasing words, 'O my friend why delay? Get them here immediately'. 
4::6::9::On hearing this, Sugriva at once entered into the deep cave of the mountain (to get the ornaments and veil) in order to please Rama.
4::6::10::That monkey brought out the veil and auspicios ornaments, showed them to Rama and said, 'Please, see.'
4::6::11::Holding the raiment  as well as the ornaments,  Rama's  eyes were filled with tears.He appeared like the Moon covered with dews.
4::6::12::On account of his deep attachment for Sita, he shed profuse tears. Unable to maintain his natural composure, he sank down to the ground, saying 'O my darling Sita' and cried inconsolably
4::6::13::Pressing the excellent ornaments to his bosom again and again Rama hissed like a cobra provoked in its anthill.
4::6::14::Rama began to wail piteously while tears streamed down his eyes incessantly. He looked at Saumitri standing by his side and said:
4::6::15::'O Lakshmana, behold the veil and the ornaments dropped on the ground by Vaidehi while she was being abducted.
4::6::16::'Sita, for sure, dropped these ornaments on the grassy ground. They are in good shape (without any damage).
4::6::17::Thus addressed by Rama, Lakshmana replied, 'I recognise neither the armlets nor the earrings. I only recognise the anklets as I used to bow at her feet daily.'
4::6::18::Then Rama said to Sugriva,.'Tell me, O Sugriva, to which region that fiercelooking demon has carried away my Sita, who is dearer than my life.
4::6::19::'Let me know where dwells that huge  ogre who has caused this agony to me. I will exterminate all the demons
4::6::20::'By abducting Maithili he has stirred my fierce anger and has opened the door of his death.
4::6::21::'O lord of monkeys tell me the whereabouts of that nightranger who has carried off my darling from the heart of the forest and has harassed her. I will send him now to the abode of Death.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे षष्ठस्सर्गःThus ends the sixth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana,  the first epic, composed by sage Valmiki.
