4::33::1::Instructed by Rama, and having been permitted, Lakshmana, the slayer of enemies entered the frightful cave of Kishkinda.
4::33::2::Seeing Lakshmana, the huge and mighty monkey gatekeepers stood at the entrance and greeted him with folded hands.
4::33::3::The monkeys kept away out of fear to see the son of Dasaratha, who was angry and sighing deeply.
4::33::4::Lakshmana, the bestower of fortune, saw the mammoth cave inlaid with gems and precious stones and forests full of delightful flowers.
4::33::5::The palace was thronged with elevated mansions and illumined with jewels of all kinds. The trees were in bloom and the fruits satisfied every one's wish.It was splendid.
4::33::6::The inhabitants of Kishkinda being sons of gods and gandharvas, were of beautiful appearance wearing wonderful garlands. They could change their form at their free will. They were delightful.
4::33::7::The royal roads were filled with fragrant unguents, like sandal, agaru and lotus incenses, finesmelling honey of several kinds and happy inhabitants. 
4::33::8::Lakshmana saw tall buildings comparable to Vindhya and Meru mountains and pure water flowing from the mountain streams.
4::33::9::On the royal road, Lakshmna saw beautiful homes of monkeychiefs Angada, Mainda, Dwivida, Gavaya, Gavaksha, Gaja, Sarabha, Vidyunmalin, Sampati, Suryaksha, Hanuman, Veerabahu, Subahu, the great Nala, Kumuda and Sushena. Similarly he saw the homes of Tara and Jambavan, Dadhivaktra, Nila, Supatala and Sunetra. (Tara mentioned here is a male monkey.)
4::33::10::These homes were shining like white clouds, with wonderful garlands hung on, filled with abundance of wealth, grains and best of females.
4::33::11::The abode of Sugriva was encircled by a white rampart and unapproachable.It was enchanting like the abode of Indra. The mansion tops were like the white peaks of Kailas mountain filled with blossoming trees which could yield all kinds of fruits to suit one's taste. The trees were huge like dark clouds, cool and shady with wonderful flowers in full bloom, the riches gifted by Indra, were delightful. The entrance was guarded by mighty monkeys holding weapons in hand. It had a golden archway at the entrance decorated with wonderful garlands and strings of golden flowers. Saumitri of great prowess entered the rich abode of Sugriva just as the Sun enters huge clouds unobstructed.
4::33::12::Righteous Lakshmana crossed the seven enclosures filled with different kinds of people and saw a great harem full of several bright gold and silver cots, excellent  seats here and there with best of cushions spread.
4::33::13::As he entered, he heard melodious sounds of string instruments and music worded to metre with different kinds of tunes.
4::33::14::Powerful Lakshmana saw many females of different forms proud of their youth and charm at the palace of Sugriva.
4::33::15::Lakshmana saw women with a good lineage adorned with colourful flower garlands and choicest ornaments engaged in making garlands and arranging fruits. He also saw at Sugriva's palace attendants, gentle, welldressed, contented and not too busy. 
4::33::16::Illustrious Lakshmana felt abashed on hearing the jingling of girdle bells and tinkling of the women's anklets.
4::33::17::On hearing the sounds of ornaments (of females), heroic Lakshmana lost his temper quickly. He pulled his bowstring forcefully in wrath producing frightening sound filling all quarters.
4::33::18::Aware of the anger of Rama (who likes it not), the longarmed Lakshmana moved away from the spot (abstained from entering private apartments) as per tradition, receded to a lonely place and stood.
4::33::19::Then, sensing the arrival of Lakshmana, by the sound of his bow string, Sugriva the lord of vanaras, alighted at once from the throne.
4::33::20::'Truly Saumitri, the loving brother of Rama has arrived as announced by Angada earlier'.
4::33::21::As proclaimed by Angada and also from the sound of the twang, Sugriva knew about the arrival of Lakshmana. His mouth parched (with fear).
4::33::22::Then Sugriva, the best of monkeys got agitated at heart out of fear. He saw the pleasing Tara and said to her these good words clearly: 
4::33::23::'O Tara with beautiful eyebrows this younger brother of Rama is normally softhearted. But today he arrived here angry. What could be the reason?
4::33::24::'O blemishless Tara  What is the cause of young Lakshmana's anger? Great men do not display anger without reason.
4::33::25::'If anything displeasing has been done by us, you should know and tell me quickly. You ought to speak to him at once.
4::33::26::'O lovely lady or else, you should see him personally and propitiate him with your soothing words.
4::33::27::'Lakshmana will be clear of all doubts on seeing you and will not be angry. Great men are not harsh to women.
4::33::28::'Start talking to him with pleasing words and make him happy. Then I shall see Lakshmana with eyes like lotuspetals, a subduer of enemies'.
4::33::29::Tara, whose eyes were drowsy with drink, whose long gold string of the girdle was hanging loose appeared before Lakshmana with faltering steps and bent low, bashful of her appearance. (It suggests a state of exhaustion after sexual pleasures).
4::33::30::Since prince Lakshmana is a great man, he stood with his face down and showing no reaction, controlled his anger due to the presence of a female standing close by.
4::33::31::Setting aside her shyness for being in a drunken state, and observing Lakshmana's favourable disposition, she spoke meaningful words in a pleasing manner with friendly eloquence:
4::33::32::'O noble prince what is the cause of your anger? Who has disrespected your command? Who can approach without fear forest fire rushing towards a thicket of dried pieces of wood?'
4::33::33::Having heard Tara's unhesitant submission spoken in a pleasant and friendly manner, Lakshmana replied: 
4::33::34::'O lady, your husband engrossed in sensual pleasures, has lost sight of dharma and artha. Why don't you understand it in the interest of your husband whose wellwisher you are?
4::33::35::'O Tara that we are in grief Sugriva does not realize. He is not attending to state affairs. He is only enjoying drinking in the company of ministers.
4::33::36::'The king of monkeys has already spent four months, enjoying drinks. He does not realize that he has flouted his promise.
4::33::37::'Drinking this way does not help accomplishment of dharma and artha. It destroys wealth, ambition and righteousness.
4::33::38::'Dharma is violated when we help not one who has helped. Loss of a virtuous friend leads to great loss of wealth. It results in destruction. 
4::33::39:: 
4::33::40::'You have a strong sense of duty. You ought to tell him his duty and what we should do in this situation.
4::33::41::Tara heard the sweet words of Lakshmana which showed his good understanding of dharma and artha. What she said to him in reply reflects her faith in Sugriva's effort to help Rama's cause:
4::33::42::'O prince this is not the time to get angry with your own people. He (Sugriva) is your friend and wishes to do your work. You should bear with him even if he makes a mistake.
4::33::43::'O prince how can you, richly endowed with virtues be angry with an inferior person? How can a person like you, preeminent in virtues,and a source of great penance fall a victim to anger?
4::33::44::'I know about the anger of (Rama), the friend of Sugriva. I am aware of the time limit set for his work. I am aware of our omissions in this regard. I also know about the mission.
4::33::45::'O Lakshmana I am aware of the irresistible strength of lust born out of the body. I am aware of Sugriva's indifference to his duty due to his  passion with whomsoever it be.
4::33::46::'You are under the grip of anger and your mind is not involved in carnal desire. One who is engaged in sensual pleasures does not reckon time and place, nor does he consider artha and dharma.
4::33::47::'O slayer of enemy heroes pardon Sugriva, the lord of vanara clan, who is to you a brother. He is here indulging in sports of love with me. He has no sense of shame about his passion.
4::33::48::'Even sages committed to piety and austerity are sometimes deluded by sensual gratification. He is a king and a monkey who is fickle by nature. How can he be not tempted by sensual pleasures'? 
4::33::49::Overcome by drunkenness, Tara once again spoke to Lakshmana of unfathomable prowess, in a meaningful way keeping in view the welfare of her playful and drunken lord:
4::33::50::'O best of men although overpowered by sense pleasures, Sugriva has already initiated efforts for the accomplishment of your work.
4::33::51::'O great warrior monkeys residing at different mountains who can assume any form they like have arrived in hundreds and thousands of crores.
4::33::52::'O longarmed one  come in. You have been standing out guarding your character. It is not a mistake to see the wife of a pious person with a friendly feeling.
4::33::53::Strongarmed Lakshmana, a subduer of enemies, permitted by Tara entered the harem immediately (thinking of the urgency of the task). 
4::33::54::Lakshmana saw famous Sugriva, difficult to be conquered, seated on a golden throne strewn around with cushions, decorated with ornaments of different colours, endearing in appearance, decked with beautiful garlands and clothes. He was surrounded by women adorned with most fascinating ornaments and garlands. Bewildered at the sight, Lakshmana's eyes turned red in anger. He appeared like Yama, lord of death.
4::33::55::The largeeyed warrior Sugriva of golden complexion was seated on an excellent throne embracing Ruma tightly.He saw largeeyed Saumitri in a jovial mood.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे त्रयस्त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtythird sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana compsed by sage Vamiki.
