4::19::1::The king of monkeys lying on the ground struck by the arrow did not offer to reply after listening to Rama's appropriate answers (to his objections).
4::19::2::Severely battered by stones, hit by trees and pierced by Rama's arrow, Vali lost consciousness as the end of his life was nearing.
4::19::3::Tara, wife of Vali, heard that her husband, tiger among monkeys, was killed in the battle by the arrow discharged by Rama.
4::19::4::Hearing the terrible, unhappy news of her husband's death, Tara anxiously rushed along with her son out of the mountain cave.
4::19::5::Alarmed at the sight of Rama holding the bow, the terribly courageous monkeys who followed Angada as his bodyguards ran in different directions.
4::19::6::Tara saw the terrorstricken monkeys running helterskelter, like the herd of deer whose leader who had strayed had been killed.
4::19::7::Sorrowful Tara, the wife of Vali, duly approaching the monkeys stricken with grief and running as if chased by the arrows of Rama at their back, said to them:
4::19::8::'O monkeys deserting the lion among kings,whose servants you are ? What should you  be frightened for ? Why run away in distress?
4::19::9::'If the (elder) brother is struck down by his (younger) brother in anger for the sake of kingship using farreaching arrows discharged by Rama, why are you running?' 
4::19::10::On hearing Tara, the wife of Vali, the monkeys who could assume any form at their will replied with clear words appropriate to the occasion:
4::19::11::'O mother, your son is still alive. Go back and protect your son Angada. Lord of death in the form of Rama has come and killed Vali and is carrying him away.
4::19::12::'Rama smashed the trees and stones Vali hurled at him and then struck him down with thunderboltlike arrows.
4::19::13::'When Vali who was equal to Indra in strength, a tiger among monkeys, was killed, the army of monkeys got terrified and ran away here and there, scattered in different directions.
4::19::14::'Let the gate of the city be shut and Vali's son be consecrated as king. All the monkeys will serve him when he assumes power.
4::19::15::'O lovely Tara, this very day other monkeys will soon occupy our citadels.
4::19::16::'There are monkeys wandering in the forest (sent away by Vali). Some of them have made others' wives their own and some have been separated from their wives. They are a great cause of fear.'
4::19::17::Hearing the words of the pettyminded monkeys, Tara spoke to them in her own way with a gentle smile:
4::19::18::'Now that the glorious Vali, a lion among monkeys, my husband is dying, of what purpose is the son, or the kingdom or my own life?
4::19::19::'I will seek the soles of the feet of the great soul who has been killed by the arrow discharged by Rama.'
4::19::20::So saying, the griefstricken, weeping Tara hastened, sadly beating with both hands her head and her chest.
4::19::21::As she was nearing (the spot) she saw her husband, a great conqueror of monkeys who never retreated  from the battle, mortally hit and fallen on the ground.
4::19::22::Vali who used to hurl huge mountains like Indra discharges thunderbolts, who had the speed  of wind of high velocity, who would roar like huge thundering clouds,
4::19::23::(Vali) who was equal to Indra in prowess looked like a huge monsoon cloud that had calmed down after pouring all water, a roaring warrior who could frighten others,  struck down by another warrior,  appeared like a lion killed by a tiger for the sake of meat
4::19::24::Vali looked like a chaitya (a tree of worship) having a banner and altar and reverentially  worshipped by the entire world, but destroyed by Garuda on account of a serpent (hidden in it). (Here Rama is Garuda, Sugriva, serpent and Vali a sacred Chaitya)
4::19::25::The auspicious lady Tara beheld Rama standing there firmly with his brother and Sugriva, leaning on the best of bows.
4::19::26:: Passing Rama and Lakshmana, she went near her husband killed in the combat. She was full of agony to see him. Deeply agitated in the mind, she fell down on the ground.
4::19::27::Tara got up again, as if she woke up from sleep and addressing her husband garlanded with death, lamented.
4::19::28::Seeing Tara crying like a female osprey and Angada following her in despair, Sugriva felt pain (at heart).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकोनविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the nineteenth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
