4::24::1::Sugriva, the unassailable younger brother of Vali, perceiving Tara overwhelmed in the ocean of grief felt agonized for the killing of his brother of incomparable power.
4::24::2::Face drenched with tears, highly sensitive Sugriva glanced at Tara for a moment. Pained and depressed at heart, and surrounded by attendants, he slowly approached Rama.
4::24::3::Duly approaching the illustrious Rama, endowed with auspicious signs, who stood with his bow and serpentlike arrows, Sugriva thus submitted:
4::24::4::'Your majesty you have struck down Vali as promised and the consequences of your action are seen now. O prince, however, my mind is not interested in the enjoyment of pleasures. I have no interest in life.
4::24::5::'O Rama when the queen (Tara) is weeping, plunged in deep sorrow, the entire city is lamenting in agony, my elder brother is dead and the survival of Angada is uncertain, my mind no longer longs for the enjoyment of the kingdom.  
4::24::6::'O prince of the Ikshvaku family, the anger due to my exilement and my intolerance of his harsh words, had made the killing of my brother agreeable to me earlier. Now that the leader of the monkey clan is killed I am  intensely hurt.
4::24::7::'I now feel dwelling long on the great mountain Rishyamuka  as usual and somehow  eking out a livelihood is preferable to attaining heaven as a sequel to the death of my brother.
4::24::8::'O Rama when the wise, highsouled Vali said to me, 'I do not like to kill you in this place be gone from here', his words reflected his nobility. This action of mine (killing of Vali) is, on the other hand, in consonance with my nature.
4::24::9::'O Rama prompted by passion, without thinking of the difference between obtaining the kingdom to satisfy one's desire and the consequent grief, which brother would  be willing to kill his virtuous elder brother?
4::24::10::'The idea of killing me was not acceptable to his noble nature, while my wicked thought caused his death.
4::24::11::'When my brother hit me with the branch of a tree I screamed for a while. But he pacified me and said it was improper and he would not repeat it.
4::24::12::'Thus while nobility, a feeling of respect,brotherliness and duty was shown to me by my brother, I exhibited wrath, passion and  frivolity, the nature of the monkey.
4::24::13::'O king  just as Indra committed sin by killing Tvashta, I have reaped the sin by  killing my brorther which is unthinkable, avoidable, undesirable and ignoble.
4::24::14::'Trees owned the sin of Indra and it was shared by the earth, water and women voluntarily.But who is there to pardon a monkey and own the sin?
4::24::15::'O Rama having acted in an unrighteous manner, which destroys the clan, I am not fit to accept the respect of people nor the status of a prince regent, what to speak of kingship?
4::24::16:: 'I have committed a sin which is condemned by the world. This intense grief has engulfed me just as the flow of rain water inundates the lowlying area when it rains.
4::24::17::'The elephant of sin (hanging heavily on me) has a tail of treacherous killing of one's own brother, which has resulted in deep sorrow in the form of a trunk, eyes, head and tusks.This elephant is striking at me as he would strike the bank of a river when he grows strong and gets puffed up with the pride of energy. (The idea of a proud elephant striking at the target is superimposed on the sin committed by Sugriva.The animal's tail is  the killing of a brother. Sugriva's remorse spreads all over the body trunk, eyes, head and tusks of the animal. As a proud elephant strikes at the river bank the sin is striking at Sugriva to destroy him. The Rupaka here is perfect and total).
4::24::18::'O distinguished Rama this anxiety is unbearable for me. My good behaviour is relegated to the back of my heart unable to bear the sin, just like the dirt surfaces pushing the bright colour of gold when burnt in fire.
4::24::19::'O Rama this race of mighty monkey chiefs is as though reduced to a halfdead state because of my action and the grief of Angada. 
4::24::20::'One can find easily a son who is controllable and accessible in need but it is difficult to find a good son like Angada, who is virtuous and mighty and who is respectful to parents. O warrior (Rama), there is no place where I can get a brother like Vali. (A brother cannot be made. His relationship is natural. Rama stresses the same subhashita in Yuddhakanda when Lakshmana swooned).
4::24::21::
4::24::22::'I am a sinner. I desire to enter the blazing fire (for atonement) in order to maintain friendship with my brother and son. At your command these vanara leaders will go round and search for Sita.
4::24::23::'O prince Rama even if I am dead the entire task of yours, will be accomplished by the  vanara race. I have ruined the whole race. I am sinful and not fit to live. Permit me (to enter fire).
4::24::24::Rama, the hero of the Raghu dynasty, a destroyer of the enemy heroes, was moved to tears. He lost composure for a moment when he heard Sugriva's lament.
4::24::25::In that moment, Rama,the protector of the world, tolerant like the earth, beheld Tara plunged in grief, looking at him again and again and weeping. 
4::24::26::The foremost ministers of Vali lifted up the beautifuleyed, noble Tara, wife of the monkey hero clinging to the body of her husband, a lion among monkeys. 
4::24::27::While Tara was clinging to her husband and struggling, and was being removed from there, she saw effulgent Rama holding bow and arrows glittering like the Sun.
4::24::28::The fawneyed Tara saw the magnificent man of Kakutstha family endowed with all royal marks and beautiful eyes, whom she had never seen before and knew he was Rama.
4::24::29::The noble Tara, desperate, agonised, totally shaken up quickly went near the magnanimous Rama,  who was like Indraunapproachable. 
4::24::30::Wise Tara, baffled out of grief and agitated, with pure consciousness, approached Rama,  eminent in warfare who could hit the target. And spoke:
4::24::31::'You are immeasurable, unassailable, self controlled, and best among the righteous. Your fame never diminishes. You have great sense of discrimination. You are known to possess forbearance like the mother earth. Your eyes are redcornered (which is a sign of valour).
4::24::32::'You are wielding bow and arrows. You possess mighty human limbs that have the power to destroy the enemy .You  have assumed a divine human body.
4::24::33::'O warrior kill me by the same single arrow with which you killed my beloved lord,Vali. I will join him after death as he will not be happy without me.
4::24::34::'If Vali with eyes of clear petals of a lotus does not see me in heaven, he may not join the wonderfully dressed apsarasas adorned with different kinds of red flowers in their hair. 
4::24::35::'O Rama Vali will experience sorrow and become pale bereft of me even in heaven just as you are filled with sorrow even on a delightful mountain slope bereft of princess of Videha.
4::24::36::'You are aware of the grief of a young man separated from his wife. Kill me so that I can go to Vali. Let not Vali experience the sorrow of not seeing me.
4::24::37::'O prince as you are great, you might think of the blemish of killing a woman. Since Tara is Vali's soul, you may kill me. It will not amount to killing a woman.(You will only be killing the soul of Vali by killing Tara).
4::24::38::'The  sacred texts as well as Vedic statements declare that wife is an inseparable part of the  husband's soul. To the learned, there is no greater offering in the world than restoring the wife to her husband. You will not beget any sin by killing me.
4::24::39::'O gallant prince  if you give me away to my dear lord, carefully considering dharma, you will not be committing any adharma by killing me since it will be an offering.
4::24::40::'O king it is proper on your part to kill me as I am in great distress. I am a helpless orphan torn away from her husband.O king I will not live long without the wise leader of monkeys who walked majestically like an elephant and wore the choicest golden necklace'. Implored by Tara this way, the great soul, Rama, lord of the earth said to Tara these words of consolation:
4::24::41::'O wife of a valiant warrior Do not lose heart. The entire world is controlled by the creator. People maintain that joy and sorrow are foreordained.
4::24::42:: 
4::24::43::Consoled by the influential Rama, scorcher of enemies, Tara the charming wife of a warrior, stopped wailing aloud.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे चतुर्विंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyfourth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
