4::47::1::The leaders of vanara troops went fast in all directions to look for Vaidehi following the instructions of  the king of vanaras.
4::47::2::They went looking everywhere in the tanks, in the bottom of rivers, in towns, in the sky and similarly in inaccessible rivers, mountains, and forts surrounded by rivers.
4::47::3::The troop leaders of the monkeys instructed by Sugriva searched in all places including mountains and forests.
4::47::4::The monkeys used to search for Sita all day determinedly and at night assemble at one place.
4::47::5::The monkeys would search all day and by night reach for rest the branches of the trees that bear fruits in all seasons.
4::47::6::The monkey leaders thus spent a month doing what they did daily and returning disappointed, met the monkey king on mount Prasravana.
4::47::7:: Having searched for Sita as instructed by  Sugriva, powerful Vinita returned along with the ministers unable to find Sita.
4::47::8::Then the great monkey hero Satabali came back from the northern direction along with the army after searching in vain for Sita. 
4::47::9::Sushena searched for a full month in the western quarter along with the monkeys and returned to report to Sugriva.
4::47::10::Sushena came to Sugriva, seated with Rama at Prasravana mountain, offered salutations and spoke:
4::47::11::'We searched for her in the mountains, in inaccessible forests, in rivers and seas and also the countryside.
4::47::12::'We searched for her in the caves, in places filled with extensive vines and huge bushes and in all places mentioned by you. 
4::47::13::'We searched again and again the interior, inaccessible and uneven locations,and killed huge animals. We searched in regions difficult to penetrate. 
4::47::14::'O king of monkeys we hope, his exhalted highness, the mighty vanara, son of the Windgod, Hanuman has gone in the direction in which Maithili has been carried off. He alone will find Sita and come back.'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे सप्तचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyseventh sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
