4::59::1::The mighty monkeys were delighted to hear the nectarlike words of the king of vultures.
4::59::2::Jambavan the king of bears got up at once from the ground along with the monkeys and spoke to the king of vultures:
4::59::3::'Where is Sita now? By whom else was she seen while being carried? Pray, tell us everything. You are the ultimate saviour of monkeys.
4::59::4::'Who is not aware of Rama's swift arrows which are like thunderbolt? Who is not able to assess the speed and power of arrows of Lakshmana released directly?'
4::59::5::Pleased to see the happiness and eagernes of the monkeys assembled to hear about Sita, Sampati continued in order to reassure them:
4::59::6::'Now hear by whom I was informed about the abduction of the largeeyed princess from Videha and where she is at present.
4::59::7::'With my vitality and prowess depleted, I have been staying for a long time on this mountain, extended by several yojanas and inaccessible.
4::59::8::'Reduced to this state, I have been maintained by food given in time by my son named Suparshva, best among birds.
4::59::9::'Gandharvas have intense passion. Serpents show violent anger. Deer have great fear. And we vultures have great hunger.
4::59::10::'Once my son came to me without meat after sunset while I was feeling hungry for food.
4::59::11::'I was thinking, tormented with hunger, my son who always keeps me happy told me exactly what had happened:
4::59::12::'O dear father I went to get food at the right time and stood blocking the entrance of mount Mahendra.
4::59::13::'There I stood alone  looking down, obstructing the path of thousands of creatures inhabiting the ocean.
4::59::14::'I saw a person who was dark and huge like a mass of collyrium carrying a lady whose radiance was like the rising Sun.
4::59::15::'Since I was looking for food I resolved to seize both of them. (But) he asked me in a gentle and courteous manner to make way (since I was blocking the aerial path).
4::59::16::'Who will strike polite people? Even the mean do not do it anywhere. And what to speak of me.
4::59::17::'He flew hurriedly with splendour as though he was enveloping the sky (making it small). All the flying creatures in the sky came and greeted me with respect.
4::59::18::'I heard the great sages saying, 'O dear you are lucky to be saved. He has somehow gone from here with that lady (without hurting you). Undoubtedly you are lucky.'
4::59::19::'I was greeted by the most illustrious siddhas. I came to know from them that he was Ravana, the king of demons. I was looking at him while he was abducting Janaka's daughter, who was the wife of Dasaratha's Rama. Her ornaments had dropped and silken robes had slipped since she lost hold on herself. She was crying, loudly calling out the names of Rama and Lakshmana, her hair dishevelled.
4::59::20::'O father this is the cause of my delay', said Suparshva, who knew the value of time.                 Thus he gave the entire account to me.
4::59::21::'Even after hearing this I could not advance (against Ravana). How could I, a vulture without wings, leap even a little?
4::59::22::'Being endowed with the faculty of thinking and speech I shall tell you what is possible for you to execute with your prowess. Listen.
4::59::23::'I will please you with my word and thought and do not doubt that Rama's task is dear to me as well.
4::59::24::'Indeed, you monkeys are very wise, strong and sensitive. The king of monkeys has sent you on this mission. You cannot be conquered even by gods.
4::59::25::'The heronfeathered arrows of Rama and Lakshmana are sharp and strong enough to protect or subdue all the three worlds.
4::59::26::'The tenheaded Ravana is mighty, powerful and strong, indeed. But you are efficient and it will not be difficult for you to achieve this task.
4::59::27::'Do not bother about the time limit. Resolve to achieve the objective, for wise people  like you should not lag behind in accepting challenges.'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे एकोनषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyninth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
