4::28::1::After the killing of Vali and installation of Sugriva as king, Rama arrived at mountain Malyavan to reside.He said to Lakshmana:
4::28::2::'Now that the rainy season has started, see the sky covered with mountainlike (huge) clouds.
4::28::3::'The sky has drained the water from the oceans through the Sun's rays and has borne it for nine months (from Kartika to Asarha) in its womb. It delivers water which is the base for all juices.
4::28::4::'It is possible to climb up to the sky on the stairs formed by the clouds and decorate the Sungod with garlands made of kutaja and arjuna flowers.
4::28::5::'The sky looks as though its wounds are dressed with pale white moistureladen bandage cloths of clouds, red in the border, tinged as they are with the glow of twilight. 
4::28::6::'The sky with its gentle winds as its sighs, its ash coloured clouds (suggestive of a pale face) painted with red sandalpaste in the form of glow of twilight appears like a passionate lover. 
4::28::7::'This earth scorched by the heat and then flooded with fresh rain water, radiating heat, appears like my Sita shedding tears burning with grief.
4::28::8::'The winds released from the wombs of clouds, cool as the delicate touch of white lotuses,charged with the fragrance of ketaka flowers can be inhaled through the hollow of one's palms.
4::28::9::'This mountain scented by the fragrance of arjuna and ketaka flowers is bathed in rain water just as Sugriva, tranquilled by the destruction of the enemy is consecrated in streams of (sacred) waters.
4::28::10::'The mountains are covered with dark clouds which appear like the hide of the antelope. Streams of rain water flowing are like the sacred threads hanging down the shoulder and the sounds of wind filling the caves resemble the recitation of Vedas by priests. (These mountains are comparable to the brahmacharins engaged in the recitation of Vedas wearing antelopeskin and sacred threads).
4::28::11::'The sky lashed with lightnings with whips of gold and emitting groans in the form of peals of thunder, appears as though crying in severe pain.
4::28::12::'The triggering of lightning in the dark clouds appears to me like austere Vaidehi struggling helplessly to get free from the lap of Ravana.
4::28::13::'Smeared as it were with dense clouds and therefore blocked the directions in which planets including the Moon cease to appear are favourable to lovers. The Moon is said to accenuate the pangs of separation from one's ladylove. Hence the quarters in which the Moon and the stars are hidden by clouds, have been favourable to the lovelorn.
4::28::14::'O Saumitri look at the kutaja flowers standing on the mountain slopes withered by the heat. They welcome the fresh showers of rain and rekindle passion in me even though my heart is overwhelmed with grief.
4::28::15::'Now the dust has settled and the wind carrying mist is cool. The torments of summer have ceased. The expeditions of kings have come to a stop and the travellers return to their native land.
4::28::16::'Desirous of living in Manasa lake swans have set out on their journey and the chakravaka birds are now united with their mates. The carts move not on the roads damaged by heavy rains.
4::28::17::'The sky which is visible here is not visible there due to clouds scattered. It looks bright (blue) here and dull there. It appears like an unruffled ocean interspersed with hills here and there.
4::28::18::'The mountainstreams of rainwater mingled with sarja and kadamba flowers carry fresh water swiftly to the ocean along with the deposits of red mineral rocks of the mountain. Hark, the peacock cries.
4::28::19::'The black bees like jambu fruits full of sweet juice. People share them to their hearts  content, while the mango fruits which take multiple colours on getting ripened drop on the ground shaken by the wind.
4::28::20::The clouds that resemble high mountain peaks, having their banners of lightning with rows of herons as garlands give out loud peals of thunder like elephants in rut trumpet in battlearray.  
4::28::21::'The tender green grass of the forest is shining with rainwater, the peacocks are having dance festival and the forests look more enchanting  in the afternoon.
4::28::22::'The huge rumbling clouds on the high mountain peaks carry heavy load of water. Now they rest and now resume their journey accompanied by herons.
4::28::23::'The happy rows of herons flying in the sky to meet the clouds, appear like a long garland of choice white lotuses strung together hanging in the sky.
4::28::24::'The earth shines with freshgrown, tender grass speckled here and there with small Indragopa insects. It appears like a woman wearing a parrotgreen veil sprinkled with red lac dye.
4::28::25:: 'Sleep steals over Lord Visnu. The rivers run swiftly to the sea, the female herons fly to catch the clouds joyfully. The young bride eagerly approaches her dear lord. (It is believed that Lord Visnu goes to sleep during chaturmasya, ie. from Asarh to Kartik)
4::28::26::'Peacocks dance in the forest. The branches of the kadamba trees get filled with flowers. Bulls long for union with the cows. The earth looks beautiful with green crops and trees. 
4::28::27::'The clouds are raining. The rivers are flowing. Proud elephants are trumpeting. Those separated from their loved ones are brooding. The monkeys are quiet and the peacocks are dancing.
4::28::28::'The lordly elephants get intoxicated with the fragrance of ketaki flowers, the noise of waterfalls and the cackle of peacocks and they give out a shrill trumpet.
4::28::29::'Having sucked honey from the flowercups filled with honey, the bees are shedding their drunkenness slowly and hanging on the branches of kadamba trees, smitten with showers.
4::28::30::'The branches of jambu trees profusely  filled with fruits appear like piled up balls of charcoal, while swarms of bees rest on the branches on the jambu trees. 
4::28::31::'The rainclouds decorated with banners of lightning and giving out peals of thunder shine like elephants in rut trumpeting, eager to fight in battle.
4::28::32::'Intoxicated elephants on their march along the mountain in the forest, hear the thundering sounds of clouds and suspecting it to be the call of proud elephants to fight turn back.  
4::28::33::'Swarms of bees hum here. Peacocks dance there. Intoxicated elephants sport in water in other places. (Thus)  the forest shows its many features.
4::28::34::'The forest region with its various types of trees like kadamba, sarja and arjuna trees and full of fresh water shines like a tavern where girls in the form of peahens dance in excitement. 
4::28::35::'Thirsty birds rejoice drinking exceedingly pure water held in leafcups offered by Indra (in the form of rain), which looks like pearls collected in the leafcups. As the drops fall on them the hue of their wings seems to change (fade).
4::28::36::'The sweet humming of bees like the music of string instruments (Vina), the croaking of frogs, the rumbling of clouds sounding like the beating of drums make it appear as if a musical concert has started in the forest.
4::28::37::'Here the peacocks are dancing and there they are singing. Elsewhere they are reclining on treetops with their big plumage hanging down. It appears as though the peacocks have started a musical concert in the forest.
4::28::38::'Frogs of different forms, colours and sounds are croaking, awakened from their long sleep by the thunders of clouds and flow of fresh rainwater.
4::28::39::'Washing away their broken banks which obstruct their way to the sea, the bloated rivers like proud young ladies with chakravaka birds borne on their surface ,which look like protruberant breasts, rush swiftly to meet their lord, the sea, chosen for full enjoyment with the gifts of flowers.
4::28::40::'Dark clouds filled with fresh water, leaning on dark clouds appear like boulders of rock, scorched with wild fire with their bases yet firmly rooted shining.
4::28::41::'Elephants roam the forestland inhabited by peacocks making noise out of joy, where the grassy land is filled with crawling Indragopa insects and the fragrance of kadamba and arjuna blossoms.
4::28::42::'The bees have quit the lotus filaments destroyed by the rain and happily move quickly towards fresh filaments of kadamba flowers.
4::28::43:: 'Intoxicated elephants roam the forest. Mighty bulls rejoice. Kings of beasts (lions) lounge. Mountains look beautiful. Kings relax. While Indra, lord of the gods, sports with clouds.
4::28::44::'With their big torrents, clouds hanging over the sky, drowning the roar of the sea, make the rivers, ponds, lakes and tanks overflow and flood the entire earth.
4::28::45::'Torrents of rain pour at great speed. Winds roar. Rivers flow swiftly changing their direction due to breach in the banks 
4::28::46::'The mountains are consecrated with waterpitchers of clouds brought by the winds, offered by Lord Indra. Just as kings, consecrated by men, display their majesty, the mountains exhibit their form and glory. (Clouds are compared with water pots)
4::28::47::'Ennveloped by clouds, the Sun and stars are not visible. The earth glides with the flow of fresh waters. The directions are not clear, covered by darkness.
4::28::48::'The huge mountain peaks are washed by the heavy downpour of rain which look like long strings of pearls hanging.
4::28::49::'The waterfalls rushing down the rocks on the huge mountains and flowing through caves, and peacocks singing create an image of broken and scattered chains of pearls.
4::28::50::'The fast flow of waterfalls spread over vast areas completely wash the surroundings  of the mountain peaks. It appears like chains of pearls collected in the lap of huge caves.
4::28::51::'The strings of incomparable waterfalls all over the mountain appear as though pearls from the chains of sexually indulgent celestial women are dropping down from heaven, broken through physical friction.
4::28::52::'The time of the setting Sun (as he remains invisible the whole day) is known  only by the birds reaching out to their dwellings for rest, and by the closing of lotuses and blossoming jasmines.
4::28::53::'Expeditions by kings come to a stop. The army returns. The flow of water blocks the roads. It suspends enmity (between states).
4::28::54::'The month of Bhadrapada meant for the recitation of the Vedas by brahmins and for those desirous of singing  Sama Veda has started.
4::28::55::'Surely Bharata, king of Kosala, would have completed the collection of all his requirement before the commencement of the month of Asarh.
4::28::56::'Just as the cheerful voices of people of Ayodhya rise as soon as they see me returning, certainly the speed of river Sarayu is rising, filled with rain water.
4::28::57::'Having defeated his enemy, Sugriva with his wife during the rainy season is wellestablished in the kingdom,  abounding in merits.
4::28::58::'O Lakshmana I have lost my wife. I have been dethroned from the mighty kingdom. I am sinking like a river bank overflowed.
4::28::59:: 'My sorrow which increases, the rains which make it hard to cover distances and Ravana the great enemyall these appear difficult to conquer.
4::28::60::
4::28::61::'Since Sugriva has gone through great difficulties and is reunited with his wives after a long time and since our task is great, I did not desire to speak to him now.
4::28::62::
4::28::63::'O Lakshmana of auspicious qualities I will wait for the proper time to appease Sugriva as well as the rivers. 
4::28::64::A hero should in return help whoever has helped him. An ungrateful person hurts the heart of the virtuous by not returning the assistance.'
4::28::65::Having heard this, Lakshmana expressed his considered opinion with due respect to handsome Rama:
4::28::66::'O Rama come Autumn, Sugriva will soon do all that you desire. Bear with the rains. Stay steadfast (in your determination) to destroy the enemy.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किंधाकाण्डे अष्टाविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyeighth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic, composed by sage Valmiki.
