4::57::1::On hearing the words that came from Angada's mouth, the sharpbeaked, loudvoiced vulture (Sampati) said:  
4::57::2::'Who is it that was Pronouncing loudly the death of my dearest brother Jatayu? This news has shaken my mind.
4::57::3::'I heard my brother's name today after a long time.I wish to know how the demon and the vulture fought at Janasthana. 
4::57::4::'I wish to be brought down from this inaccessible mountain peak by all of you. I am glad to have heard from you the name of my younger brother after a long time. He is virtuous, valiant and praiseworthy.
4::57::5::'O bulls among monkeys I desire to hear about the death of my brother Jatayu, who was dwelling at Janasthana.
4::57::6::'How did Dasaratha develop friendship with my brother? I hear that Rama who is the favourite firstborn of Dasaratha has endeared himself to all elders.
4::57::7::'O tamers of foes as my wings are burnt down by the Sun's rays it is not possible for me to move forward. I wish you help me to get down from this mountain'.
4::57::8::The leaders among monkeys did not trust his words even though his voice was choked with grief. They suspected his intentions.
4::57::9::On seeing the vulture, the monkeys fasting unto death got a terrible thought in their minds that the vulture might eat them.
4::57::10::'Since we wish to die, we will be accomplishing our objective successfully if he eats us soon'.
4::57::11::Thus thought the chief among the monkeys. Angada having helped the vulture come down the mountain peak, said:
4::57::12::'O powerful bird my revered grandfather Riksharaja was a glorious king of monkeys. He had two sons called Sugriva and Vali.Both were strong like floodwaters. My father Vali was wellknown in this world for his remarkable deeds.
4::57::13::'The great warrior Rama is the son of Dasaratha, the scion of the Ikshvaku race and the king of the entire world. He entered Dandaka forest along with his brother Lakshmana and consort Vaidehi obeying his father's command following a righteous path.
4::57::14::'His wife was abducted from Janasthana by Ravana. The king of vultures Jatayu, a friend of Rama's father observed princess of Videha, being forcibly carried away through the aerial region.
4::57::15::'Jatayu destroyed Ravana's aerial chariot and put Maithili in a (safe) place. But being old and exhausted, he was killed in a combat by Ravana. 
4::57::16::'Thus the vulture was slain by Ravana who was stronger. Cremated by Rama and his last rites performed, he reached the supreme heavenly abode. (It was the luck of Jatayu, unlike Dasaratha, to be cremated by Rama.)
4::57::17::'Then Rama made friendship with my father's brother, great self Sugriva and killed my father.
4::57::18::'Sugriva and his ministers developed hostility towards my father. Rama killed Vali and installed Sugriva as king.
4::57::19::'Sugriva, the monkey king, was installed by him and crowned as king of the monkeys. Sugriva is the king of all great monkeys. We have been sent by him in search of Sita.
4::57::20::find her just as one fails to see Sun's radiance at night.
4::57::21::'Having searched the forest of Dandaka carefully, we all entered this large hole unknowingly.
4::57::22::
4::57::23::'Because of the fear of king Sugriva all of us have decided to stay here fasting unto death,since we have exceeded the time fixed for us (to find Sita).
4::57::24::'Even if we go back, there is no hope of our survival before the anger of Sugriva and of Rama and Lakshmana of the Kakutstha dynasty.'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे सप्तपञ्चशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends of fiftyseventh sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramyana composed by sage Valmiki.
