4::5::1::Leaving Rishyamuka, Hanuman reached the Malaya mountain. Seeing the chief of monkeys there, he announced the arrival of  the heroic Raghavas.
4::5::2::'This Rama of greatwisdom and valour, endowed with the power of truth has arrived here along with his brother Lakshmana. 
4::5::3::'Born in the Ikshvaku race Rama Dasaratha's son, distinguished for his righteousness is here to carry out the orders of his father.
4::5::4::'While the great Rama armed with selfrestraint was living in the forest, his wife was abducted by Ravana. So he has come to you seeing refuge.
4::5::5::'This Rama, son of a king who had gratified the firegod through many yajnas like  Rajasuya and Aswamedha, gifted hundreds of thousands of cows and ruled this earth with truth and austerity, has come seeking help for a woman.'
4::5::6::'Both the brothers, Rama and Lakshmana seek friendship with you. As both of them are worthiest of worship, welcome them with due reverence.'
4::5::7::Hanuman's words took away Sugriva's great fear for Rama and filled him with cheer. This bull among monkeys gave up his natural appearance and and assuming an attractive human form spoke to Rama lovingly: 
4::5::8::'You are a great hero, affectionate to all and wellversed in all dharmas. The son of the Windgod has, in fact, apprised me  of your virtues
4::5::9::'O Lord that you are eager to have friendship with me, who is a monkey is a great honour and is extremely beneficial to me.
4::5::10::'If you are desirous of my friendship, here is my arm (palm) stretched out to you. With due regard, establish our bond firmly, holding my palm in yours.' 
4::5::11::Rama became very happy to hear Sugriva's warm words and pressed his hand with his. Delighted, he went close  to Sugriva and hugged him tightly and  affectionately. 
4::5::12::Then, Hanuman vanquisher of enemies, gave up his guise of a mendicant, assumed his natural form and generated fire by rubbing two pieces of wood. Wellpleased at heart, he made an offering of flowers to the flaming fire and placed it between them.
4::5::13::They both circumambulated the blazing fire and solemnized their friendship.
4::5::14::Rama and the monkey contented at heart, yet not fully content, continued looking at each other.
4::5::15::'You are a dear friend to me. Your sorrow is my sorrow, your pleasure is my  pleasure. We are one and the same' said Sugriva to Rama, his heart overflowing with happiness.
4::5::16::Then Sugriva cut the branch of a sala tree with luxuriant leaves and flowers, spread it on the ground and sat down along with Raghava.
4::5::17::Then Hanuman, the bull among monkeys, felt very happy, cut the branch of a sandalwood tree full of flowers and gave it to Lakshmana.
4::5::18::Then Sugriva, eyes sparkling with joy, replied to Rama in a sweet, gentle voice.
4::5::19::'O Rama, I have been insulted deeply and my wife hijacked. Stricken with fear I have taken refuge in this inaccessible forest.   
4::5::20::'O Rama humiliated by my brother Vali, I have developed enmity with him. Terribly distraught and disturbed I live in this forest in great fear.
4::5::21::'O reverend Kakutstha, I feel helpless with fear from Vali. Save me. You should release me free from fear.'
4::5::22::The righteous and glorious Rama to whom dharma is very dear said to Sugriva with a gentle smile on his face, when he was entreated thus:
4::5::23::'O great monkey I know friendship is the fruit of a beneficial deed. I will kill that Vali who has usurped your wife.
4::5::24:: 'These arrows covered with kanka feathers, sharp and straight at the tip, comparable to great Indra's thunderbolt are (burning bright) like the sun. Looking like angry serpents, they will unfailingly strike at the miscreant Vali soon.
4::5::25::'With these sharp, serpentlike arrows Vali will be killed. He will fall down on the ground like a mountain shattered.You will see it now'.
4::5::26::Sugriva, very much pleased with the words of Rama, spoke highly (of him).
4::5::27::'O Rama, by your grace I will get my wife and kingdom back. O king accomplish this so that I can destroy my, elder brother, my enemy, O lion among men 
4::5::28::While Sugriva was making a friendly alliance with Rama, Sita's left eye, like lotus, Vali's left eye glittering like gold and Ravana's left eye blazing (like fire) twitched at the same time for a moment (Twitching of left eye is considered auspicious to a woman and ominous to a man).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे पञ्चमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fifth sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
