4::59::1::ततः then, अमृतास्वादम् tasting nectar, गृध्रराजेन by the king of vultures, भाषितम् spoken, तत् वचः those words, निशम्य on listening, ते they, प्लवगर्षभाः mighty monkeys, मुदिताः delighted, हृष्टाः pleased.
4::59::2::वानरश्रेष्ठः king of bears, जाम्बवान् Jambavan, सर्वैः by all, प्लवङ्गमैः सह with all monkeys, सहसा at once, भूतलात् from the ground, उत्थाय  got up, गृध्रराजानम् to the king of vultures, अब्रवीत् said.
4::59::3::सीता Sita, क्व where is she, केन वा by whom, दृष्टा was seen, मैथिलीम् to the princess from Mithila, को वा who did, हरति was carrying, भवान् you, तत् सर्वम् everything about that, आख्यातु tell, वनौकसाम् to the monkeys, गतिः ultimate saviour, भव you are.
4::59::4::वज्रवेगनिपातिनाम् of those falling as swiftly as thunderbolt, दाशरथिबाणानाम् of Rama's arrows, स्वयम् directly, लक्ष्मणमुक्तानाम् released by Lakshmana, विक्रमम् power, कः who, न चिन्तयति is not taking seriously.
4::59::5::सः Sampati, प्रीतः pleased, प्रीतिसंयुक्तान्  happy, सीताश्रुतिसमाहितान् assembled to hear about Sita, हरीन् monkeys, आश्वासयन् reassuring them, पुनः again, इदं this वचनम् words, अब्रवीत् said.
4::59::6::वैदेह्या: of the princess from Videha, हरणम् abduction, मे by me, यथा as, श्रुतम् heard, येन च and by whom, मम  to me, आख्यातम् was informed, आयतलोचना largeeyed lady, यत्र च and where, इह now, श्रूयताम् you hear.
4::59::7::बहुयोजनम् several yojanas, आयते wide, दुर्गे in this inaccessible place, अस्मिन् गिरौ on this mountain, चिरात् for a long time, निपतितः fallen, अहम् I am, वृद्धः old, क्षीणप्राणपराक्रमः with my vitality and prowess depleted.  
4::59::8::एवं गतम् Reduced to this state, तम् him, माम् me, पतताम् among birds, वरः best among, नामतः named, सुपार्श्वो नाम Suparshva, पुत्रः son, यथाकालम् in time, आहारेण with food, बिभर्ति maintains.
4::59::9::गन्धर्वाः gandharvas, तीक्ष्णकामाः with intense passion, भुजङ्गमाः serpents, तीक्ष्णकोपाः with violent anger, मृगाणाम् for the deer, भयम् fear, तीक्ष्णम् is intense, ततः then, वयम् we, तीक्ष्णक्षुधा: have intense hunger.
4::59::10::कदाचित् once, मम पुत्रः my son, सः he, आहाराभिकाङ्क्षिणः with intense longing for food, मम myself, क्षुधार्तस्य for me so hungry, अहनि day, गतसूर्ये after sun set, अनामिषः without meat, प्राप्तः came.
4::59::11::आहारसंरोधात् with no food, माम् me, पीडितं I was tormented, सः he, प्रीतिवर्धनः  who makes me happy, अनुमान्य suspected, यथातत्त्वम् what had truly happened, इदं वचनम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
4::59::12::तात O father, अहम् I, आमिषार्थी intending to get food, यथाकालम् at the right time, महेन्द्रस्य गिरेः of Mahendra mountain, द्वारम् at the entrance, आवृत्य covering, सुसमास्थितः I was stationed.  
4::59::13::तत्र there, सागरान्तचारिणाम्  by the inhabitants of the ocean, सत्त्वसहस्राणाम् of thousands of creatures, पन्थानम् path, सन्निरोद्धुम् obstructing the path, एकः I alone, अवाङ्मुखः looking downwards, अध्यवसम् stood.
4::59::14::सूर्योदयसमप्रभाम् a lady like the radiance of the rising Sun, स्त्रियम् lady, आदाय carrying, गच्छन् was going, भिन्नाञ्जनचयप्रभः dark and huge like a mass of collyrium, कश्चित् some one, मया by me, तत्र there, दृष्टः was seen.
4::59::15::तौ both, दृष्ट्वा seeing, अभ्यवहारार्थी looking for food, कृतनिश्चयः resolved, विनीतेन politely, तेन by him, साम्ना in a courteous manner, पन्थानम् path, अनुयाचितः requested.
4::59::16::सामोपपन्नानाम् for polite people, प्रहर्ता who strikes, जनः people, नीचेष्वपि even among the mean, कश्चित् any one, क्वचित् at any place, न हि not do, मद्विधः one like me, किमङ्ग not to say, बत indeed.
4::59::17::सः he, वेगत: hurriedily, तेजसा with splendour, व्योम the sky, सङ्क्षिपन्निव as if he was enveloping, यातः he proceeded, अथ now, अहम् I, खेचरैः by the flying creatures  in the sky, भूतैः by creatures, अभिगम्य approached, सभाजितः respected me
4::59::18::तात O dear child, दिष्ट्या lucky, जीवसि you are, असौ he, सकलत्रः with a lady, कथञ्चित्  some how, गतः went, ते to you, असंशयम् no doubt, स्वस्ति be it safe, इति thus, महर्षयः the great sages, माम् me, अब्रुवन् saying. 
4::59::19::ततः then, अहम् I, परमशोभनैः by the glorious, सिद्धैः by siddhas, एवम् that way, दाशरथेः of the son of Dasaratha, रामस्य Rama's, भार्याम् wife, जनकात्मजाम् daughter of Janaka, भ्रष्टाभरणकौशेयाम् ornaments dropped and silken robe slipping, शोकवेगपराजिताम् overcome with the force of grief, रामलक्ष्मणयोः of Rama and Lakshmana, नाम name, क्रोशन्तीम् while she cried,  मुक्तमूर्धजाम् hair dishevelled, हरन् while abducting, सः he, रक्षासाम् राजा king of demons, रावणः Ravana, प्रतिवेदितः came to be known.
4::59::20::तात O dear father, एषः this, कालात्ययः cause of delay, इति thus, कालविदां among those  who knew the value of time, वरः best among birds, सुपार्श्वः Suparhsva, एतमर्थम् this account, समग्रम् in detail, मे to me, प्रत्यवेदयत् reported.
4::59::21::तत् that, श्रुत्वाऽपि even on hearing, मे me, पराक्रमे in advancing (against Ravana), काचित् any such , बुद्धिः thought, नासीत् could not attempt, अपक्षः without wings, पक्षी bird, किञ्चित् कर्म do even a little , कथम् how, उपक्रमे could I start.
4::59::22::वाग्बुद्धिगुणवर्तिना  endowed with the faculty of thinking and speaking, मया by me, यत् such, कर्तुम् to execute, शक्यम् capable, भवताम् to you, पौरुषाश्रयम् with your prowess, तत्र there, वक्ष्यामि I shall tell, श्रूयताम् you may listen.
4::59::23::सर्वेषाम् for all of you, वः to you, वाङ्मतिभ्याम् by word and thought, प्रियम् dear to you, करिष्यामि I will do, यत् हि whatever, दाशरथेः to Dasarathi, कार्यम् is the task, तत् that, मम to me, अत्र there, संशयः doubt, न not.
4::59::24::ते those of you, मतिश्रेष्ठाः very wise, मनस्विनः sensitive , बलवन्त: strong, देवैरपि even by gods, दुरासदाः unapproachable, भवन्तः you are, कपिराजेन by king of monkeys, प्रेषिताः sent.
4::59::25::कङ्कपत्रिणः heronfeathered, निशिताः sharp, रामलक्ष्मणबाणाश्च are the arrows of Rama and Lakshmana, त्रयाणाम् all the three, लोकानाम् of worlds, त्राणनिग्रहे to protect or subdue, पर्याप्ताः are enough.
4::59::26::दशग्रीवः the tenheaded Ravana, तेजोबलसमन्वितः खलु कामम् is mighty, powerful and strong, तु but, समर्थानाम् for the efficient ones, भवताम् for you, दुष्करम् difficult, किञ्चिदपि even a little, न not.
4::59::27::तत् then, कालसङ्गेन by complying to the time limit (set by Sugriva), अलम् enough, बुद्धिनिश्चयः resolute, क्रियताम् may be made, भवद्विधाः persons like you, बुद्धिमन्तः wise people, कर्मसु in accepting challenges, न सज्जन्ते हि not lag behind.
