4::62::1::'When thus I spoke to the venerable sage in that manner roaring very painfully the divine sage replied after reflecting silently for a moment:
4::62::2::'You will get new wings and feathers and also other parts.You will attain vision, life, prowess and strength.
4::62::3::'I have foreseen with the power of my penance that a great task will be done by you. I have also heard about it in the Puranas and came to know of it.
4::62::4::'Indeed in the Ikshvaku family there will be a king named Dasaratha. He will beget a brilliant son named Rama.
4::62::5::'On account of the command of his father, Rama armed with the strength of truth will proceed to the forest with his brother Lakshmana.
4::62::6:: 'The king of demons, Ravana who is indestructible even by gods and demons will be abducting his wife from Janastahana.
4::62::7:: 'Immersed in grief, chaste and famed Sita, will not take any food or enjoy pleasures however much she is tempted.
4::62::8::'Knowing that Vaidehi is not eating food(given by Ravana) Indra,the ruler of gods, will offer nectarlike food rare even for gods.
4::62::9::'Having understood that it has been provided by Indra, Sita will take out a large portion of it and pour it on the ground (as an offering to Rama) and say 'I offer it to Rama wherever he is on earth'.
4::62::10::'If my husband and Lakshmana are living or else even if they have attained heaven let this food be enjoyed by them', Sita will say.
4::62::11::'Rama's messenger and other monkeys will be coming to search for the his queen. O Sampati you should narrate this to them. 
4::62::12:: 'It is good for you in all respects to remain here. Where can you go (without wings)? Wait for appropriate time and place. You will recover your wings'.
4::62::13::'I am not enthusiastic about giving you the wings now. Remain here and carry on the work for the welfare of the world.
4::62::14::'(Carry on) the work not only for the princes (Rama and Lakshmana) but also for the brahmins, sages, gods and others who live here.
4::62::15::'I also want to see Rama and Lakshmana. But I do not like to hold on to my life for long. Hence I will give up my body'. The knower of self, the sage (Nishakara) said this to Sampati.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे  द्विषष्टितम स्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtysecond sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
