4::30::1::सुग्रीवे (when) Sugriva, गुहम् residence, प्रविष्टे entered, गगने into the sky, घनैः heavy clouds, विमुक्ते is cleared, वर्षरात्रे rainy night, कामशोकाभिपीडितः agonised out of love, रामः Rama, पाण्डुरम् pale white, गगनम् sky, विमलम् clear, चन्द्रमण्डलम्  orb of the Moon, दृष्ट्वा  seeing, ज्योत्स्नानुलेपनाम् covered with bright moonlight, शारदीम् of autumn, रजनीं चैव night like, बुद्ध्वा known, कामवृत्तम् engaged in love, सुग्रीवम् Sugriva, नष्टाम् lost, जनकात्मजां च Janaka's daughter, अतीतम् exceeded, कालम् time, दृष्ट्वा seeing, परमातुरः perturbed, मुमोह च swooned.
4::30::2::मतिमान् sensible man, पुन: again, सः राघवः that Rama, मुहूर्तात् in a short time, संज्ञाम् consciousness, उपागम्य having regained, मनःस्थामपि present in his mind, वैदेहीम् of Vaidehi, चिन्तयामास thinking of.
4::30::3::पर्वतस्य mountain's, हेमधातुविभूषिते adorned with gold and minerals, अग्रे on top, आसीनः seated, शारदम् autumnal, गगनम् sky, दृष्ट्वा on glancing, मनसा in his mind, प्रियाम् of the beloved, जगाम went on thinking.
4::30::4::व्योमं sky, गतविद्युद्वलाहकम् rid of clouds and lightning, सारसारवसङ्घुष्टम् filled with the cackle of flocks of Sarasa cranes, विमलम् clear, दृष्ट्वा च on glancing, आर्तया in a pitiable, गिरा tone, विललाप cried.
4::30::5::सारासारावनादिनी (lady whose voice) resembles that of sarasa birds, या बाला that young lady, आश्रमे in the hermitage, सारासारावसन्नादैः with sweet sounds of sarasa birds, रमते enjoying, सा she, अद्य now, कथम् how, रमते  revelling?
4::30::6::पुष्पितान् blossomed, काञ्चनानिव like gold, निर्मलान् pure, असनान् asana flowers, दृष्ट्वा seeing, पश्यन्ती while seeing, माम् me, अपश्यती not seeing, सा बाला that young lady, कथम् how, रमते will she feel?
4::30::7::चारुसर्वाङ्गी a lady with beautiful limbs, कलभाषिणी sweettongued, या she, पुरा earlier, कलहंसानाम् of the swans, स्वरेण by the sound, बुध्यते is awakened, मे my, सा she, अद्य now, कथम् how, बुद्ध्यते is awakened.
4::30::8::पुण्डरीकविशालाक्षी lady with large, pale white eyes, एषा such, सहचारिणाम् of her companions, चक्रवाकानाम् of Chakravaka birds, निस्वनम् sweet voices, निशम्य  listening, कथम् how, भविष्यति will she be.
4::30::9::सरांसि lakes, सरितः rivers, वापीः wells, काननानि forests, वनानि च and groves, चरन् wandering, अद्य now, ताम् मृगशाबाक्षीं that fawneyed lady, विना without, सुखम् pleasure, न लभे not happy.
4::30::10::शरद्गुणनिरन्तरः charm of autumn, कामः Cupid, सौकुमार्यात्  of delicate body, मद्वियोगाच्च due to separation, ताम् from me, भामिनीम् lovely lady, सुदूरम् very far, पीडयेत् अपि tormented.
4::30::11::नरश्रेष्ठ: best of men, नृपात्मजः prince, त्रिदशेश्वरात् from lord of the gods, सलिलम् water, सारङ्गः Saranga, विहङ्ग इव like bird, एवमादि in the same way, विललाप he lamented.
4::30::12::ततः then, फलार्थी for getting fruits, रम्येषु from the beautiful, गिरिसानुषु the mountain slopes, चञ्चूर्य went about looking, पर्युपावृत्तः going round and round, लक्ष्मीवान् graceful man, लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, अग्रजम् elder brother, ददर्श saw.
4::30::13::मनस्वी venerable, तं him, सौमित्रिः Saumithri, दुस्सहया with the unbearable, चिन्तया with sorrow, परीतम् extreme agony, विसंज्ञम् lost senses, एकं alone, समीक्ष्य observing, भ्रातुः brother's, विषादात् with grief, परितापदीनः pathetic and dejected, (त्वरितः at once) रामम् to Rama, उवाच spoke.
4::30::14::आर्य O revered (brother), कामस्य वशंगतेन succumbed to passion, किम् why, आत्मपौरुष्य  selfconfidence, पराभवेन defeat, किम् of what use, सदा ever, अयम् this, समाधिः composure, संहियते is withdrawn, अत्र निवर्तितेन desisting from, योगेन from yoga, किम् why?
4::30::15::अदीनसत्त्व: an undaunted warrior, क्रियाभियोगम् make efforts to work, मनसः mind's, प्रसादम् serenity, समाधियोगानुगतम् followed by contemplative mood, कालं च taking advantage of time, सहायसामर्थ्यम् strength of effort, हेतुम् cause, स्वकर्म च by your own effort, हेतुम् cause of success, कुरुष्व  achieve.
4::30::16::मानववंशनाथ O lord of the human race, त्वया by you, सनाथा  protected , जानकी Janaki, परेण by any one, सुलभा easy to obtain, न not, वीर hero, वरार्ह best, ज्वलिताम् blazing, अग्निचूडाम् burning fire, उपेत्य after reaching, कच्छित् any one, न दह्यते (इति) न is not burnt.
4::30::17::रामः Rama, सलक्षणम् a man of good signs, अप्रधृष्यम् an unassailable warrior, लक्ष्मणम् Lakshmana, स्वभावजम् natural, हितम् beneficial, पथ्यं च and useful, नयप्रसक्तम् sanctioned by, ससाम conciliatory, धर्मार्थसमाहितं च in accordance with dharma and artha, वाक्यम् these words, उवाच spoke.
4::30::18::कुमार dear, निस्संशयम् no doubt, कार्यम् the work, अवेक्षितव्यम् should be considered, क्रियाविशेषोऽहि and requires special attention, अनुवर्तितव्यः should be followed, प्रवृत्तस्य (of the work) to be commenced, दुरासदस्य of the unassailable, कार्यस्य of action, फलं च fruit also, चिन्त्यं ननु surely need to think.
4::30::19::अथ then, रामः Rama, पद्मपलाशाक्षीम् lady with eyes like lotus petals, मैथिलीम् Mythili, अनुचिन्तयन् while worrying, परिशुष्यता with dried up, मुखेन with mouth, लक्ष्मणम् Lakshmana, उवाच said
4::30::20::सहस्राक्षः thousandeyed Indra, सलिलेन  with water, वसुन्धराम् the earth, तर्पयित्वा having satisfied, सस्यानि crops, निर्वर्तयित्वा  brought  back, कृतकर्मा done his duty, व्यवस्थितः settled down.
4::30::21::नृपात्मज prince, स्निग्धगम्भीरनिर्घोषाः with pleasing deep sound, शैलद्रुमपुरोगमाः wandering over trees on the mountains, मेघाः clouds, सलिलम् waters, विसृज्य having showered, परिश्रान्ताः exhausted.
4::30::22::नीलोत्पलदलश्यामा dark like the petals of blue lotuses, पयोधराः rainbearing clouds, दश ten, दिशः directions, श्यामीकृत्वा having filled with darkness, विमदाः devoid of intoxication, मातङ्गाः इव like elephants, शान्तवेगाः became quiet.
4::30::23::सौम्य O dear, जलगर्भाः laden with water, महामेघाः huge clouds, कुटजार्जुनगन्धिनः the fragrance of kutaja and arjuna flowers, समुद्यताः are blowing, वृष्टिवाताः winds carrying rainwater, चरित्वा having moved, विरताः stopped.
4::30::24::अनघ O sinless one, लक्ष्मण Lakshmana, घनानाम् of heavy clouds, वारणानां च and of elephants, मयूराणां च and peacocks, प्रस्रवणानां च and of waterfalls, नादः sound, सहसा suddenly, प्रशान्तः stopped.
4::30::25::महामेघैः with huge clouds, अभिवृष्टाः having showered rain, निर्मलाः clean, चित्रसानवः peaks of different colours, गिरयः mountains, चित्रदीप्तिभिः glowing in variegated colours, अनुलिप्ताः इव as if smeared , आभान्ति appear.
4::30::26::अद्य now, शरत् autumn, सप्तच्छदपादपानाम् the sevenleafed banana, शाखासु on their branches, तारार्कनिशाकराणाम् among stars, Sun and Moon, प्रभासु in their radiance, उत्तमवारणानाम् among the best of elephants, लीलासु च in their sporting, श्रियम् grace, विभज्य divided, प्रवृत्ता has set in.
4::30::27::सम्प्रति at present, अनेकाश्रयचित्रशोभा  manifesting  beauty in varied manner, शरत्कालगुणोपपन्ना brought about by the merits of the season, लक्ष्मीः goddess of wealth, सूर्याग्रहस्तप्रतिबोधितेषु touched by the rays of the Sun, पद्माकरेषु the lotuses, अधिकम् exceedingly, विभाति shines.
4::30::28::षट्पादबृन्दैः swarms of honeybees, अनुगीयमानः humming, पवन: the wind, अनुसारी a follower, सप्तच्छदानाम् saptachada trees, कुसुमोपगन्धी carrying the fragrance of flowers, मत्तद्विपानाम् of elephants in rut, दर्पम् pride, विनेष्यन् leading it forward, अधिकम् increasingly, करोति doing.
4::30::29::हंसाः swans, अभ्यागतैः  coming together and facing each other, चारुविशालपक्षैः by the birds with lovely wide wings, सरःप्रियैः lovers of lakes, पद्मरजोवकीर्णैः covered with the pollen dust of lotuses, महानदीनाम् of great rivers, पुलिनोपयातैः by those settled on the sand banks, चक्रवाकैः सह with chakravakas, क्रीडन्ति sporting.
4::30::30::मदप्रगल्भेषु among the proud, वारणेषु among the elephants, दर्पितेषु among the excited, गवाम् of bulls, समूहेषु among herds, प्रसन्नतोयासु in the clear water, निम्नगासु च in the streams, बहुधा severally, विभक्ता divided, लक्ष्मीः beauty, विभाति shining.
4::30::31::वनेषु in the forests, मयूराः peacocks, अम्बुधरैः by the clouds, विमुक्तम् devoid, नभः sky, समीक्ष्य on seeing, विमुक्तबर्हाभरणाः those who have shed their ornamental plumage, प्रियासु loved ones, असक्ताः lost interest, विनिवृत्तशोभाः their glory withdrawn, गतोत्सवाः devoid of happiness, ध्यानपराः are absorbed.
4::30::32::मनोज्ञगन्धैः finesmelling, पुष्पातिभारावनताग्रशाखैः  tips of branches bent with heavy load of flowers, सुवर्णगौरैः golden coloured, नयनाभिरामैः delightful to the eyes, अनल्पैः by many, प्रियकैः by priyaka trees, वनान्तराणि forestland, उद्योतितानीव as if illuminated.
4::30::33::अद्य now, प्रियान्वितानाम् accompanied by their loved ones, नलिनीप्रियाणाम्  who love lotus ponds,  वने रतानां  who enjoy the forest, कुसुमोद्धतानाम्  who are enthused by the smell of flowers,मदलालसानाम् of the deeply passionate, मदोत्कटानाम् of the excited by intoxication, गजोत्तमानाम् lordly elephants, गतयः movements, मन्दाःare slow
4::30::34::व्यभ्रम् bereft of clouds, नभः sky, शस्त्रविधौतवर्णम्  shining like polished weapons, नदीजलानि river water, कृशप्रवाहानि have thin flow, कह्लारशीताः cool by blowing over white lotuses, पवनाः winds, प्रवान्ति are blowing, तमोविमुक्ताः rid of darkness, दिशः quarters, प्रकाशाः shining.
4::30::35::सूर्यातपक्रामणनष्टपङ्का mud dried up with the heat of the Sun, भूमिः earth, चिरोदघाटितसान्द्ररेणुः thick dust raised after a long time, अन्योन्यवैरेण with mutual enmity, समायुतानाम् of those endowed with, नराधिपानाम of the kings, अद्य now, उद्योगकालः right time for expeditions.
4::30::36::शरद्गुणाप्यायितरूपशोभाः appearance made attractive by the attributes of Autumn, प्रहर्षिताः happy, पांशुसमुत्क्षिताङ्गाः dust settled on their limbs, मदोत्कटाः excited  by passion, गवाम् cows, मध्यगताः surrounded, वृषाः bulls, सम्प्रति now, युद्धलुब्धाः are ready to fight, नदन्ति bellowing.
4::30::37::समन्मथां a passionate lord, तीव्रगतानुरागा with very deep love, कुलान्विता animals of high breed, मन्दगतिं slowly moving male partner, करिण्यः female elephants, वनेषुः in the forest, यान्तम् while he moves, मदान्वितम् who is in rut, भर्तारम् their male partner, सम्परिवार्य after encircling, अनुप्रयान्ति follow him.
4::30::38::आत्मविभूषितानि their wear, वराणि excellent, बर्हाणि feathers, त्यक्त्वा shed, नदीनाम् of the rivers, तीरोपगताः on the banks, मयूराः peacocks, सारसौघैः by the herds of sarasa birds, निर्भर्त्स्यमानाः इव as though taunted, दीनाः piteous, विमदाः devoid of high spirit, प्रयान्ति going.
4::30::39::भिन्नकटाः elephants in rut (exuding ichor), गजेन्द्राः best elephants, महारवैः with loud trumpet, कारण्डवचक्रवाकान् waterbirds like ducks and chakravakas, वित्रास्य after terrorising, बद्धाम्बुजभूषणेषु ornamented with blooming lotuses, सरस्सु in tanks, जलम् water, विक्षोभ्य विक्षोभ्य stirring, पिबन्ति drinking.
4::30::40::व्यपेतपङ्कासु in spots cleared of mud, सवालुकासु  sand dunes, प्रसन्नतोयासु pure water, सगोकुलासु with cows, ससारसारावनिनादितासु where sarasa birds are singing delightfully, नदीषु in the rivers, हंसाः swans, हृष्टाः happily, निपतन्ति reach.
4::30::41::सम्प्रति now, नदीघनप्रस्रवणोदकानाम् of the water of rivers, clouds and waterfalls, अतिप्रवृद्धानिलबर्हिणानाम् of peacocks excited by blowing winds, गतोत्सवानाम् having lost pleasure, प्लवङ्गमानां च and the frogs, सम्प्रणष्टाः lost, द्रुतं quickly.
4::30::42::अम्बुधरेषु as the rainclouds, नवोदितेषु when seen fresh, नष्टाः lost, सुविनष्टकायाः bodies emaciated, अनेकवर्णाः of different colours, क्षुधार्दिताः troubled by hunger, घोरविषाः highly poisonous, चिरोषिताः staying for a long time, सर्पाः serpents, बिलेभ्यः from anthills, विप्रसरन्ति are coming out.
4::30::43::चञ्चच्चन्द्रकरस्पर्शहर्षोन्मीलिततारका with the touch of Moon's beams, रागवती red in colour, सन्ध्या twilight, स्वयम् on her own, अम्बरम् sky, जहाति  quitting, अहो Oh
4::30::44::शशाङ्कोदितसौम्यवक्त्रा  with a face made beautiful with moonlight, तारागणोन्मीलितचारुनेत्रा her beautiful eyes opened up by stars, रात्रिः night, शुक्लांशुकसंवृताङ्गी her body draped in the robe of white light (of the moon), नारीव like a woman, विभाति appears bright ज्योत्स्नांशुकप्रावरणा wrapped in the robe of moonlight.
4::30::45::विपक्वशालिप्रसवानि stocks of paddy full of ripened grain, भुक्त्वा after eating, प्रहर्षिता very joyful, सारसचारुपङ्क्ति: lovely rows of sarasa birds, शीघ्रवेगा at great speed, वातावधूता flown by wind, ग्रथिता strung, माला इव like a garland, नभः sky, समाक्रामति occupies.
4::30::46::सुप्तैकहंसम् one swan sleeping, कुमुदैः night lotuses, उपेतम् endowed, महाह्रदस्थम् found in a big tank, सलिलम् water, निशि at night, घनैः with clouds, विमुक्तम् devoid, तारागणाकीर्णम् be sprinkled with stars, पूर्णचन्द्रम् full Moon, अन्तरिक्षम् इव like the sky, विभाति shining.
4::30::47::प्रकीर्णहंसाकुलमेखलानां swans scattered around like girdles, प्रबुद्धपद्मोत्पलमालिनीनाम् with bloomimg and lilies lotuses like garlands, वाप्युत्तमानाम् of deep wells, लक्ष्मीः Goddess of wealth, अद्य now, भूषितानाम् decorated, वराङ्गनानामिव like excellent ladies, अधिका very much.
4::30::48::वेणुस्वरव्यञ्जिततूर्यमिश्रः mixed with the melodies of the  bamboos, अनिलसम्प्रवृद्धः enhanced by the wind, सम्मूर्छितः overwhelming, शब्दः (bellowing) sounds, प्रत्यूषकाले of early morning, गर्गरगोवृषाणाम् of the bulls moving inside the caves, अन्योन्यम्  with each other, आपूरयतीव  as if filling.
4::30::49::नदीनाम् of rivers, कूलानि banks, कुसुमप्रभासैः full of fresh bloomimg flowers, मृदुमारुतेन by the gentle wind, व्याधूयमानैः made to move, धौतामलक्षौमपटप्रकाशैः shining like a clean white silken cloth, नवैः  fresh, काशैः  kasa reeds, उपशोभितानि shine.
4::30::50::वनप्रचण्डाः roaming fearlessly in the forest exhibiting their power, मधुपानशौण्डाः  adept in drinking honey, प्रहृष्टाः joyfully, मत्ताः deluded, पद्मासनरेणुगौराः appeared white by the pollen dust of lotus cups, षट्चरणाः bees, प्रियान्विताः along with their female companions, वनेषु in the forest, पवनानुयात्राम् following the wind, कुर्वन्ति are venturing.
4::30::51::कुमुदं प्रभासम् lilies in full bloom, क्रौञ्चस्वनम् the cackle of krauncha birds, प्रसन्नम् clear, जलम् waters, विपक्वम् fully ripe, शालिवनम् paddyfields, मृदुः gentle, वायुः breeze, विमलः bright, चन्द्रश्च Moon, वर्षव्यपनीतकालम् coming to an end of the rainy season, शंसन्ति speak out.
4::30::52::मीनोपसन्दर्शितमेखलानाम् displaying fish as girdles, नदीवधूनाम् of riverbrides, गतयः flow, अद्य now, प्रभातकालेषु in the early morning, इव as if, कान्तोपभुक्तालसगामिनीनाम् like the women exhausted with sexual pleasures, कामिनीनाम् इव like the beloveds, मन्दाः gentle.
4::30::53::सचक्रवाकानि with all the chakravaka birds, सशैवलानि with green moss, दुकूलैरिव as if with silk clothes, काशैः with reeds, संवृतानि covered, नदीमुखानि faces of rivers, सपत्रलेखानि    designs drawn on green leaves, सरोचनानि with Gorochana, वधूमुखानीव like the bride's face.
4::30::54::अद्य now, प्रफुल्लबाणासनचित्रितेषु cheerful as though painted with bana and asana flowers, प्रहृष्टषट्पादनिकूजितेषु bees are humming happily, वनेषु in the forest, गृहीतचापोद्यतचण्डदण्डः holding the bow and awarding strict punishment, कामः Cupid, प्रचण्डचारः moving with great speed and power.
4::30::55::तोयधराः clouds, सुवृष्ट्या with good showers, लोकम् people, परितोषयित्वा after satisfying, नदीः rivers, तटाकानि च and tanks, पूरयित्वा having filled, वसुधाम् earth, निष्पन्नसस्याम् green all over with crops, कृत्वा after doing, नभः sky, त्यक्त्वा leaving, प्रणष्टाः disappeared.
4::30::56::नवसङ्गमसव्रीडाः bashful of the sexual union with husband for the first time, योषितः young women, जघनानीव their loins, शरन्नद्यः bashful, पुलिनानि sand banks, शनैः शनैः slowly, दर्शयन्ति show.
4::30::57::सौम्य O gentle Lakshmana, प्रसन्नसलिलाः with pure waters, कुररीभिर्विनादिताः resounded with the singing of female kurari birds, चक्रवाकगणाकीर्णाः with flocks of chakravaka birds, सलिलाशयाः water tanks, विभान्ति are shining.
4::30::58::गिरिसानुषु on the mountain slopes, पुष्पिताः blossomed, असनाः asana flowers, सप्तपर्णाश्च saptaparnas, कोविदाराश्च kovidaras, बन्धुजीवाः bandhujeeva trees, श्यामाश्च Shyama creepers, दृश्यन्ते are seen.
4::30::59::लक्ष्मण Lakshmana, नदीनाम् of rivers, पुलिनानि sand banks, हंससारचक्राह्वैः with swans sarasa and chakravaka birds, कुररैश्च and kurara, समन्ततः allover, अवकीर्णानि scattered, पश्य  look.
4::30::60::नृपात्मज O prince, सौम्य O handsome one, अन्योन्यबद्धवैराणाम् having enmity against others, जिगीषूणाम् waiting to be victorious, पार्थिवानाम् of kings, उद्योगसमयः time for expeditions, उपस्थितः has come.
4::30::61::नृपात्मज O prince, इयम् this, पार्थिवानाम् for kings, सा that, प्रथमा यात्रा first expedition, सुग्रीवम् Sugriva, तथाविधम् in that manner, उद्योगं वा or effort, न च पश्यामि I do not see.
4::30::62::सीताम् Sita, अपश्यतः not seeing, सौम्य O gentle one, शोकाभिभूतस्य caught in grief, मम to me, वर्षशतोपमाः equal to a hundred years, वार्षिकाः rainy, चत्वारः four, मासाः months, गताः are gone.
4::30::63::चक्रवाकीव just as a female chakravaka, भर्तारम् husband, विषमम् difficult, वनम् forest, दण्डकारण्यम् Dandaka forest, उद्यानमिव like pleasure garden, पृष्ठतः at the back, अनुगता followed.
4::30::64::लक्ष्मण O Lakshmana, प्रियाविहीने separated from wife, दुःखार्ते a griefstricken man, हृतराज्ये  lost kingdom, विवासिते banished, मयि at me, राजा सुग्रीवः king Sugriva, कृपाम् mercy, न कुरुते not showing.
4::30::65::सौम्य gentle, परन्तप vanquisher of foes, अयम् this person, अनाथः helpless, हृतराज्यः lost  kingdom, दीनः miserable, दूरगृहः away from home, रावणेन च,by Ravana, धर्षितः outraged,कामी lovesick, मां चैव me also, शरणं गतः sought help, इत्येतैः by these, कारणैः with reasons, दुरात्मनः of the evilminded, वानरराजस्य of the king of monkeys, सुग्रीवस्य Sugriva's, अहम् I am, परिभूतः slighted.
4::30::66::दुर्मतिः evilminded, सः he, कृतार्थः fulfilled his objective, सीतायाः Sita's, परिमार्गणे in search of, कालम् time, परिसङ्ख्याय having failed, समयम् promise, कृत्वा made, नाव बुध्यते does not realise it.
4::30::67::किष्किन्धाम् into Kishkinda, प्रविश्य entering, वानरपुङ्गवम् chief of monkeys, मूर्खम् fool, ग्राम्यसुखे native pleasures, सक्तम्  is engaged, सुग्रीवम् Sugriva, मम my, वचनात् words, ब्रूहि tell him.
4::30::68::उपपन्नानाम् approached, पूर्वम् earlier, उपकारिणां च and  who has helped, अर्थिनाम् the one who requested , संश्रुत्य with regard to, आशाम् hopes, यः he who, हन्ति disappoints, सः he, लोके on the earth, पुरुषाधम: lowest among men.
4::30::69::यः हि he who, शुभं वा good or, यदि वा or else, पापम् sin, उदीरितम् which has been promised, वाक्यम् words, सत्येन truly, प्रतिगृह्णाति will follow, सः वीरः he is a hero, पुरुषोत्तमः  the best of men.
4::30::70::कृतार्थाः one who has achieved his objective, ये whoever, अकृतार्थानाम् of the needy man, मित्राणाम् to the friends, न भवन्ति not help, मृतान् after death, कृतघ्नान् ungrateful people, तान् them, क्रव्यादाः अपि even by carnivorous animals, न उपभुञ्जते not like to eat.
4::30::71::नूनम् surely, काञ्चनपृष्ठस्य inlaid with gold, रणे in war, मया by me, विकृष्टस्य when bent, चापस्य bow's, विद्युद्गणोपमम्  like a streak of lightning, रूपम् form, द्रष्टुम् to see, इच्छसि desires.
4::30::72::संयुगे in the combat, क्रुद्धस्य of the enraged, मम my, वज्रस्य thunderbolt's, निर्घोषमिव like the terrific sound, घोरम् dreadful, ज्यातलनिर्घोषम् twang of the bow string, पुनः again, संश्रोतुम् to hear, इच्छसि  wants.
4::30::73::वीर a hero, नृपात्मज prince, अस्य his, परिज्ञाते knowing fully, पराक्रमे my valour, काम् एवं गतेऽपि  revelling in sensual pleasures, त्वत्सहायस्य when you are with me to help, मे my, चिन्ता worry, न स्यात् has no .
4::30::74::परपुरञ्जयः one who can conquer the enemy's capital, यदर्थम् what for, अयम् this, आरम्भः effort, कृतः one who made, समयम् promise कृतार्थः one who has achieved his goal, प्लवगेश्वरः king of monkeys, नाभिजानाति does not realise.
4::30::75::हरीश्वरः Sugriva, वर्षासमयकालम् in the rainy season, प्रतिज्ञाय having sworn, विहरन्  revelling, व्यतीतान् spent, चतुरः four, मासान् months, नावबुध्यते he is not aware.
4::30::76::सुग्रीवः Sugriva, सामात्यपरिषत् with the council of ministers, क्रीडन् sporting, पानमेव in drinking only, उपसेवते resorting to, शोकदीनेषु wretched with sorrow, अस्मासु at us, दयाम् compassion, न कुरुते is showing.
4::30::77::महाबल mighty, वीर warrior, गच्छ go, त्वया by you, सुग्रीवः Sugriva, मम my, रोषस्य about my anger, यत् such, रूपम् form, उच्यताम् make him know, एवम् that way, इदम् this, वचः word, वत्स dear, ब्रूया: tell.
4::30::78::सुग्रीव Sugriva, समये as per pledge, तिष्ठ  abide, हतः killed, वाली Vali, येन by the root, गतः had gone, पन्थाः path, न च सङ्कुचितः is not a narrow one, वालिपथम् Vali's path, मा अन्वगाः you do not follow.
4::30::79::मया by me, रणे in a combat, शरेण by an arrow, एकः one, वाली एव Vali alone, हतः killed, सत्यात् from the truth, अतिक्रान्तम् deviated from the truth, त्वां तु you also, सबान्धवम् along with your near and dear, हनिष्यामि I will kill.
4::30::80::पुरुषर्षभ O bull among men, नरश्रेष्ट O king among monkeys, तत् therefore, कार्ये in the task, एवम् in this way, विहिते when carried out, यत् all that, हितम् is good, तत् all that, ब्रूहि tell, त्वर be quick, कालव्यतिक्रमः time is passing.
4::30::81::वानरेश्वर O king among monkeys, शाश्वतम् eternal, धर्मम् dharma, अवेक्ष्य following, मम my, प्रतिश्रुतम् promise, सत्यम् truth, कुरुष्व  doing, अद्य now, त्वम् you, मयि my, शरैः by arrows, चोदितै: hit by, प्रेत्य  killed, यमक्षयम् abode of Yama, गतः gone, वालिनम् Vali, मा पश्येः will see.
4::30::82::मानववंशनाथः protector of the human race, उग्रतेजाः terrific lustre, सः he (Lakshmana), तीव्रविवृद्धकोपम् very angry, दीनम् piteous, लालप्यमानम् wailing, पूर्वजम् elder brother, प्रसमीक्ष्य on seeing, हरीश्वरे at Sugriva, तीव्रम् intense, मतिम् in mind, चकार went.
