4::67::1::'In order to cross a hundred yojanas, Hanuman, the best of monkeys expanded his  might and strength. Seeing him, a warrior of great strength, all the monkeys, filled with enthusiasm at once gave up grief and collected together.They rejoiced and propitiated him screaming aloud.
4::67::2::The monkeys collected together happily, gazing at Hanuman.They were wonderstruck to see Hanuman in that huge form, just as all beings were when they saw Lord Narayana in his incarnation of Vamana.
4::67::3::The monkeys praised the mighty Hanuman as he grew in size whirling his tail around joyfully.
4::67::4::As Hanuman was being praised by the monkey leaders, his body filled with lustre. It looked excellent.
4::67::5::Just as a lion grown in a mountain cave stretches its body, the Windgod's son stretched  (his limbs) at that time.
4::67::6::On expansion, wise Hanuman's face was bright, glowing like a burning oven and  shining like smokeless fire.
4::67::7::Hanuman risen from the midst of the monkeys with his hair bristling on the body (due to expansion of body), saluted reverentially to the elderly monkey Jambavan and said :
4::67::8::'The Windgod is a friend of fire who is a powerful consumer of oblations. His strength is immeasurable. He wanders in the sky and shatters the mountain tops.
4::67::9::'I am the lawfulson of the swiftmoving Windgod, Maruta, comparable to him in leaping.
4::67::10::'I can with all enthusiasm go round the vast mount Meru a thousand times without resting on it which is as though scratching the sky.
4::67::11::'I can submerge this world including its mountains rivers and lakes. I can push back the sea waters quickly with my arms.
4::67::12::'Thrust by my thighs,the ocean will rise up, carrying with it the shanks and  mighty crocodiles stunned by the force.
4::67::13::'I am capable of circumambulating a thousand times the great Garuda who consumes snakes and flies in the sky, the abode of birds.
4::67::14::'O bull among monkeys when the Sun rises from behind the eastern mountain it is possible for me to start with him and go to the western horizon and return before the blazing Sun with its beams of light sets. It is also possible for me to descend to  the earth with the same speed and return to the Sun without touching the earth.
4::67::15::'If I rise up, I can overtake all those creatures flying in the sky and from there I can stir up the ocean and tear up the earth easily.
4::67::16::'O monkeys when I leap, I can crush the mountains into powder and pull the vast ocean with me with the force of my thighs.
4::67::17:: And then as I leap through the sky flowers of many kinds of creepers and trees will follow me. 
4::67::18::'O monkey when I fly upward in the dreadful sky or descend down, all creatures will see me, for my path will be the path of the constellation of Swati (a group of stars).
4::67::19::'O monkeys when I fly in the sky like the great mount Meru, you will see me as if I am swallowing the sky because I will be enveloping it with my strides.
4::67::20::
4::67::21::'Only Garuda and Maruta have the capacity to fly like me. No one other than the king of vultures and the Windgod have the speed to fly like me.
4::67::22::'Just as the lightning generated by the clouds lands at once flying in the sky without any support I can also land in less than a moment.
4::67::23::
4::67::24::'O monkeys I have a feeling in my mind that I will see Vaidehi. Be happy.  
4::67::25::'I am equal to Maruta and Garuda in speed. I feel I can cover ten thousand yojanas (at a stretch).
4::67::26::'I think I can encounter Indra, wielder of the thunderbolt and obtain nectar from his hands. I can even confront Brahma, the selfborn creator courageously. I can even uproot Lanka and carry it.'
4::67::27::The monkeys looked at him and were amazed, happy to see him roaring and shining in brilliance.
4::67::28::Jambavan, the finest of the monkeys, felt very glad on hearing his words which put an end to the sorrow of the kith and kin and said:
4::67::29::'O son of Kesari O son of Maruta O hero you have removed the great grief of your race, dear
4::67::30::
4::67::31::'By the blessings of the sages and by the grace of the elderly monkeys may you cross over the vast ocean.
4::67::32::
4::67::33::Then the tiger among monkeys, Hanuman said to those forestdwellers (monkeys), 'The earth cannot bear the thrust of my leaping.
4::67::34::'The rocks on the peaks of the ranges of mount Mahendra cannot with stand it, although they are huge and firm.
4::67::35::'I will pick up speed on the peaks of mount Mahendra filled with different kinds of trees and minerals.
4::67::36::'O great monkeys these mountain peaks can withstand the crushing force of my feet as I leap over a hundred yojanas.
4::67::37::The son of Maruta, who was as eminent as the Windgod, the crusher of enemies ascended the great mountain Mahendra, full of grassland inhabited by deer, thickly grown with various trees and creepers full of fragrant flowers and fruits, where roam lions and tigers and proud elephants, a place that echoes with sounds of intoxicated birds and waterfalls.
4::67::38::The mighty, preeminent monkey who was equal to Indra in valour took a leap from the high peaks of the tall mountain, Mahendra৷৷
4::67::39::Crushed by the feet of the great self, Hanuman, the huge mountain looked like a proud elephant struck by a lion.
4::67::40::The rocks of the mountain got scattered by the force. The deer and elephants were terrified. The trees were shaken up violently and streams of water gushed forth. 
4::67::41::Shaken by the rude shock, couples of intoxicated gandharvas left in a huff the vast slopes of the great mountain. Flocks of birds and groups of vidyadharas flew away. The serpents went into hiding. Rocks fell off the shaken mountain.
4::67::42::The serpents with their bodies half protruded out of the rocks and hissing looked like flags planted on the mountain.
4::67::43::The alarmed and agitated sages abandonned the mountain peaks.The mountain appeared like a lone traveller separated from the caravan in the great forest.
4::67::44::Magnanimous, wise and heroic Hanuman, destroyer of enemy warriors, fixed his attention on speed, betook himself mentally to Lanka (ere he reached it physically). इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामाणये वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे सप्तषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyseventh sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first epic, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
