4::27::1::After the consecration, Sugriva entered the cavecity (of Kishkinda) and Rama accompanied by his brother reached mountain Prasravana.
4::27::2::The (Prasravana) mountain reverberated with the terrific roars of tigers and deer and lions. There were several kinds of shrubs, creepers and trees.It was inhabited by bears, apes, monkeys and wild cats in large number. The mountain was like a huge cluster of clouds. The waters in the ponds were pure.
4::27::3::Rama and Lakshmana decided to reside in the long, wide cave on top of the great mountain. 
4::27::4::Sinless Rama, the delight of the Raghus made an agreement with Sugriva and then spoke appropriately to Lakshmana, his obedient brother and enhancer of glory:
4::27::5::'O Saumitri, subduer of enemies this beautiful mountain cave is spacious and  adequately ventilated. We will reside here in the rainy season.
4::27::6::'O prince this lovely mountain peak is lofty. It has white, black and red stones with many kinds of minerals scattered all over. It is delightful with caves and streams, and various clusters of trees and variegated vines. The chirps of several kinds of birds as well as the sounds of excellent peacocks are heard here. This place is delightful with bushes of jasmine, kunda and sindhuvara, sireeshaka, kadamba, arjuna and sarja in bloom.
4::27::7::'O prince this pond with lotus creeper and lotuses in full bloom is endearing. It is located not far from the cave.
4::27::8::'O goodnatured Lakshmana the descending path on the northeastern side of the cave and elevation on the the west is auspicious.This place is protected from rain water and  from strong wind.  
4::27::9::'O Lakshmana at the entrance of the cave is a rock, smooth and large,  resembling a heap of shining collyrium.
4::27::10::'O dear look at the mountain peak in the north rising like a raincloud.It is auspicious.  It resembles a heap of collyrium.
4::27::11::'In the southern direction is a white rock appearing as if it is another mountain. It looks like mount Kailas and is rich with various minerals.
4::27::12::'Look at the river flowing towards the east. It has clean water and flows towards the east of the cave and looks like the river Jahnavi flowing on the mount Trikuta. This place looks delightful with the sandalwood, tilaka, sala, tamala, atimukta, padmaka, sarala and asoka trees. 
4::27::13::'See the different kinds of trees like canes timida, vakula, ketaka, hintala, tinisa, kadamba, dhava, krutamalaka, betasa grown here and there  on the bank (of the river), which  looks beautiful like a woman decorated with clothes and ornaments. 
4::27::14::'The river flocked with hundreds of birds chirping melodious notes and specially the chakravaka birds which are clinging to their mates in great love are moving in pairs.The river has lovely sandy banks filled with swans and sarasa birds. The river appears as though a young woman decked all over is laughing.
4::27::15::'The river looks wonderful with lotuses now blue, now red and now white.
4::27::16::'This placid river water is haunted by waterbirds, peacocks and kraunchas, It is inhabited by groups of sages. 
4::27::17::'See the uniform rows of sandalwood trees, it looks as though they are arranged together imaginatively.
4::27::18::'O Saumitri destroyer of enemies this place is most enchanting. Surely we will reside here sporting in joy .
4::27::19::'O prince  Sugriva's delightful city of Kishkinda with wonderful forest around is not  far from here.
4::27::20::'O hero among the victorious, the sounds of vocal and instrumental music, the beating of drums and shrieking of monkeys are heard (from here).
4::27::21::'Having obtained his wife, his kingdom and attained prosperity the monkey chief,                                 Sugriva will be surely enjoying the company of friends and relatives'.
4::27::22::Having said so, Rama resided with Lakshmana on the Prasvarana mountain with many beautiful caverns and shrubs of vines.
4::27::23::Though Rama was residing in comfort on the mountain richly endowed with many pleasant things, he experienced little happiness.
4::27::24::Specially with the rising Moon in the east, he remembered his abuducted wife who was dearer to him than his life.
4::27::25::As Rama lay in bed, at night, his grief rose and choked him with tears.
4::27::26::Seeing Rama worried and engrossed in endless sorrow, his brother Lakshmana who was equally sad spoke these words of consolation:
4::27::27::'O heroic one, you know one who broods fails to achieve his objective. So do not brood.
4::27::28::'O Rama you are a man of action, enterprising. You are godfearing, righteous and religious. You will not be able to kill a crooked enemy in a battle, especially a demon, with your valour if you make no endeavour.
4::27::29::'Root out sorrow. Be daring. Be firm in resolve. (Only) then can you destroy the demon and his family.
4::27::30::'O Kakutstha, you can turn the earth with its oceans, forests and mountains, what to speak of Ravana.
4::27::31::'This is the rainy season.Wait for autumn.Thereafter you will destroy Ravana along with his kingdom and clan.
4::27::32::'I am only awakening your dormant valour as one would kindle the fire covered with ashes by making offerings.'
4::27::33::On hearing the good counsel and auspicious words of Lakshmana, Rama spoke these loving and warm words: 
4::27::34::'O Lakshmana you have spoken the words of an affectionate and friendly counsellor of proven valour.
4::27::35::'This sorrow which dampens one's daring spirit is given up. I shall now resort to such  undaunted valour during my heroic exploits.
4::27::36::'I will wait for autumn. I will stick to your advice while I wait until Sugriva and the rivers are pleased (with moderate flow of water.)
4::27::37::
4::27::38::Then Lakshmana reflected upon the words of Rama thoughtfully. He honoured his brother's words by receiving his advice with folded hands and spoke to his handsome brother giving out his own views:
4::27::39::'O lord of men, your desire will be fulfilled soon. Be determined to fight the enemy while waiting for autumn. Forgive this rainy season (and its water that obstructs).
4::27::40::'Control your anger and wait for autumn. Pardon these (intervening) four months (which put a halt on your wareffort). Stay with me on this mountain infested with lions. Brace up to kill the enemy.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे सप्तविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyseventh sarga of Kishkindakanda of the Holy Ramayana, the first epic, composed by sage Valmiki.
