4::63::1::वाक्यविशारदः skilful in speech, सः he (sage), एतैः by these, अन्यैश्च and others, बहुभिः by many, वाक्यैः with words, माम् me, प्रशस्य having praised, अभ्यनुज्ञाप्य permitted me to leave, स्वम् his own, आलयम् dwelling, प्रविष्टः entered. 
4::63::2::अहम् I, पर्वतस्य of the mountain, कन्दरात् from the cave, शनैः शनैः slowly and slowly, विसर्पित्वा having crawled, विन्ध्यम् Vindhya, समारुह्य after climbing, भवतः you, प्रतिपालये I am waiting for your arrival.
4::63::3::अद्य now, एतस्य कालस्य of this time, साग्रम् more than, वर्षशतम् one hundred years, गतम् have passed, मुनेः sage's, वचः words, हृदि in heart, कृत्वा by bearing, देशकालप्रतीक्षः waiting for the right time and place, अस्मि I am.
4::63::4::निशाकरे when Nishakara, महाप्रस्थानम् the last journey, आसाद्य having launched, स्वर्गते when he reached heaven, बहुभिः by many, वितर्कैः with alternatives, वृतम् filled with, माम् me, सन्तापः sorrow, निर्दहति it is burning.
4::63::5::मरणे for death, उत्थिम् intending, बुद्धिम् my mind, मुनिवाक्यैः  sage's words, निवर्तये I avert, मे my, प्राणानाम् of life, रक्षणे in protecting, तेन by him, मे my, या such, बुद्धिः thought, दत्ता is given, सा that, दीप्ता glowing, अग्निशिखा like the flames of fire, तमः इव like darkness, मे my, दु:खम् agony, अपनयते take away.
4::63::6::दुरात्मनः of the evilminded, रावणस्य Ravana's, वीर्यं बुद्ध्यता knowing his valour, मया by me, मैथिली princess from Mithila, कथम् how, न त्राता not protected, वाग्भिः with (harsh) words, पुत्रः son, संतर्जितः goaded.
4::63::7::तस्याः her, विलपितम् wailing, श्रुत्वा on hearing also, तौ both (Rama and Lakshmna), सीताविनाकृतौ separated from Sita, मे for me, दशरथस्नेहात् in view of my friendship with Dasaratha, पुत्रेण by my son, प्रियम् pleased, न उत्पादितम् not created.
4::63::8::तदा then, संहतैः together with, वानरैस्सह with the monkeys, तस्य when he, एवम् in that way, ब्रुवाणस्य while he was speaking, वनचारिणाम् of forestdwellers, समक्षम् in the presence, पक्षौ both wings, उत्पेततुः started appearing. 
4::63::9::सः he, अरुणच्छदैः with red feathers, उद्गतैः grown, पक्षैः with wings, स्वाम् his, तनुम् body, दृष्ट्वा seeing, अतुलम् unparalleled, प्रहर्षम् delight, लेभे experienced, वानरान् monkeys, इदम् thus, अब्रवीत् च and said.
4::63::10::अमितात्मनः of the most revered soul, ऋषेः sage, निशाकरस्य Nishakara's, प्रभावात् due to his grace, आदित्यरश्मिनिर्दग्धौ those that are burnt by Sun's radiant heat, मे my, पक्षौ both wings, पुनः again, उपस्थितौ have grown.
4::63::11::यौवने in youth, वर्तमानस्य while I was, मम my, यः that, पराक्रमः valour, आसीत् had been, तमेव the same one, अद्य now, अवगच्छामि I find, बलम् strength, पौरुषमेव even courage, च also.
4::63::12::सर्वथा by all means, यत्नः effort, क्रियताम् may be made, सीताम् Sita, अधिगमिष्यथ you will trace, मम me, अयम् this, पक्षलाभः growing of wings, वः to you, सिद्धिप्रत्ययकारकः is a proof of your success in future. 
4::63::13::पतगोत्तमः foremost of birds, सम्पातिः Sampathi, सर्वान् all, सः those, हरीन् monkeys, इति in this way, उक्त्वा having said, खगमः the bird, गतिम् direction, जिज्ञासुः eager to find, गिरेः mountain's, शृङ्गात् from the peak, उत्पपात flew up.
4::63::14::हरिशार्दूलाः tigers among monkeys, तस्य his, तत् वचनम् those words, श्रुत्वा after hearing, प्रतिसंहृष्टमानसाः in turn felt very happy, विक्रमाभ्युदयोन्मुखाः hoping success with their valour, बभूवुः  became.
4::63::15::अथ now, पवनसमानविक्रमाः as strong as the wind, प्रतिलब्धपौरुषाः regained courage, प्लवगवराः best of the monkeys, अभिजिदभिमुखाः facing Abhijit, जनकसुतापरिमार्गणोन्मुखाः eager to find the daughter of Janaka, दिशम् direction, ययुः went.
