4::65::1::Thereafter, on hearing Angada, all the leaders among the monkeys, Gaja, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sarabha, Gandhamadana, Mainda, Dvivida, Sushena and Jambavan as well expressed one after  the other their capability for leaping.
4::65::2::Gaja said he can leap ten yojanas and Gavaksha said he can go upto twenty yojanas.
4::65::3::Then Gavaya said to the monkeys 'I can leap thirty yojanas Sarabha said 'I can leap forty yojanas' bright Ghandhamadana said 'I can leap as far as fifty yojanas without any doubt' Mainda said 'I can leap more than sixty yojanas' highly brilliant Dvivida said in turn, 'I can no doubt leap seventy yojanas ' brilliant and best of the monkeys Sushena declared 'I can leap across eighty yojanas'.
4::65::4:: When the monkeys were talking (of their individual capacity) in that manner about their speed, Jambavan the oldest of the monkeys inferred (their capacity) and said:
4::65::5::'Earlier I was also very courageous, but now I have become old and reached the fag end of life.
4::65::6::'However  in this situation, it is not possible for us to neglect (our task) as it is the order of the monkeyking and Rama who are determined to achieve the objective.
4::65::7::
4::65::8::Jambavan, the distinguished among the monkeys again said, 'My strength to leap into the sky was not only that much (I was stronger in my youth and could cover longer distances)'
4::65::9::'In the past, at the time of the wellknown yagna (of king Bali) I was very strong. I circumambulated the eternal Vishnu while he was taking three strides (in his incarnation of Trivikrama Vamana.)
4::65::10:: 'Having grown old I do not have the same courage. In my youth my prowess was incomparable and none could excel me. 
4::65::11::'I guess that at this time I do not have the capacity to fly to that extent. Achieving the objective is out of question with this much of energy.
4::65::12::'Then the wise Angada said to great Jambavan, in a gentle manner about his  own strength. 
4::65::13::'I can  certainly go to a distance of a hundred yojanas. However, I cannot say whether I will have enough capacity to return?
4::65::14::Jambavan who was skilful in speech spoke to that great Angada, 'O leader among monkeys and bears your energy to cover this distance is wellknown to us'.
4::65::15::'You can go upto even a hundred thousand yojanas and have the required energy to return also. But it is not proper to send you (because you are the heir apparent). 
4::65::16::
4::65::17::'O scorcher of enemies, you are established as the commander of the army and it is proper for us to protect you as we protect our wives.
4::65::18::'O subduer of enemies in acomplishing this task you are the root. O dear therefore you should always be taken care of by us just like the wife looked after. 
4::65::19::'The root of any objective should be protected well. This is the basis of an accomplisher. Only when the roots are intact, the trees have the ability to yield flowers and fruits.
4::65::20::'O warrior of proven valour O subduer of enemies in achieving this objective you are the source, being endowed with valour and wisdom.
4::65::21::'O best of monkeys you are the son of my guide (Vali) and respectable. We will be capable of accomplishing the goal only under your protection and guidance.
4::65::22::Jambavan, the wise monkey having said that, Angada, the great son of Vali, replied:
4::65::23::'If I do not go and no other monkey leader goes, then we have to resort to fasting unto death once again.
4::65::24::'If I do not fulfil the objective of the wise king of monkeys I cannot save my life even after returning there (Kishkinda).
4::65::25::'The monkey king has the authority to shower grace or give vent to his anger. If we go without fulfilling the task we will face destruction.
4::65::26::'Therefore, think over well so that we do not fail ultimately. You have a vision.You should suggest means by which this mission does not misfire.'
4::65::27::On listening to Angada's words, Jambavan, the  bull among monkeys, replied this way:
4::65::28:: 'O hero this work will not be balked. I will now inspire one who can achieve this task.'
4::65::29::Then Jambavan the most eminent among the monkeys went to Hanuman, the  celebrated one among the monkey leaders and a renowned one, who was sitting alone quietly at some distance Jambavan motivated him. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये किष्किन्धाकाण्डे पञ्चष्षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyfifth sarga in Kishkindakanda of the first poem, the Holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
