4::62::1::एवम् thus, उक्ता having spoken, मुनिश्रेष्ठः venerable sage, मरुदं roared, दुःखितो भृशं very sadly, अथ then, ध्यात्वा reflecting, मुर्हूतं for a moment, भगवान् divine sage, इदम् thus, अब्रवीत said.  
4::62::2::पक्षौ तु wings, ते to you, प्रपक्षौ च and feathers, पुन: again, अन्यौ and other, प्राणाश्च life also, चक्षुषी eyes, चैव also, विक्रमश्च prowess, बलं च and strength, ते to you, भविष्यतः you will attain.
4::62::3::पुराणे in the purana (history), सुमहत् very great, कार्यं task, भविष्यति will happen, मया by you, श्रुतं I heard, दृष्टं seen, मे with my, तपसा by the power of penance, चैव also, श्रुत्वाच I heard, मम me, विदितम् I came to know. 
4::62::4::इक्ष्वाकुनन्दनः delight of the Ikshvaku family, दशरथो Dasaratha, नाम named, राजा king, कश्चित indeed, तस्य his, पुत्रो son, महा highly, तेजाः effulgent, रमो Rama, नाम by name, भविष्यति will beget.
4::62::5::अस्मिन्नर्थे on account of, नियुक्तस्सन् assigned by, पित्रा his father, सत्यपराक्रमः strength of truth, सह भ्रात्रा with his brother, लक्ष्मणेन accompanied by Lakshmana, गमिष्यति will proceed, अरण्यं the forest.
4::62::6::सुरदानवैः by gods and demons, अवध्यः indestructible, राक्षसेन्द्रो king of demons, रावणो by Ravana, नाम named, जनस्थनात् from Janasthana, नैऋतो in the southwest direction, तस्य his, भार्यां wife, हरिष्यति will be abducting.
4::62::7::महाभागा noble, यशस्विनी famed, दुःखे in sorrow, मग्ना immersed, न भोक्ष्यति will not eat, सा she, च and, कामैः pleasures, प्रलोभ्यन्ती however, भक्ष्यै: eatables, भोज्यैश्च to be enjoyed, मैथिली princess from Mithila.
4::62::8::सुराणाम् of gods, वैदेह्या by Sita, दास्यति avoiding to eat, ज्ञात्वा knowing, वा to, स: he, परमान्नंतु divine food, यदन्नम् as food, अमृतप्रख्यम्  like nectar, अपिदुर्लभं that which is difficult to get.
4::62::9::तदन्नं such food, मैथिली princess from Mithila, प्राप्य received, विज्ञाय having understood, अदिदंत्विति this is provided by, इन्द्रात् Indra, अग्रम् large portion, उदृत्य taken out, रामाय for Rama, भूतले on the earth, निर्वपिष्यति offers.
4::62::10::मे my, भर्ता husband, लक्ष्मणेन with Lakshmana, सह along with, प्रभुः king, यदि like that, जीवति if living, देवत्वं attained heaven, गच्छतः have gone, वापि or so, तयो: their, अन्नमिदंत्विति let this food be enjoyed by them. 
4::62::11::रामदूताः Rama's messenger, एष्यन्ति and others that way, अन्वेषका to search, तस्याः for her, प्लवांगमाः monkeys, आख़्येया narrate, रामः Rama, महीषी queen, त्वया your, तेभ्यो to them, विहंगम bird (Sampati).
4::62::12::सर्वथा in all respects, हि indeed, न गन्तव्यम् should not leave, इदृशः remain here, क्व गमिष्यसि where can you go, देशकालौ time and place, प्रतीक्षस्व waiting for, पक्षौ wings, त्वं yours, प्रतिपत्स्यसे will again grow.
4::62::13::नोत्सह not enthusiastic, इयम् for me, अहंकर्तु if I make you get (the wings), मध्यैव remain here, त्वां your, सपक्षकम् your wings, इहस्थ: here itself, त्वं you, तु to you, लोकानां हितां good for the world, कार्यं task, करिष्यसि you will do.
4::62::14::त्वया your, अपि and, खलु for all, तत् that, कार्यं task, तयो: for both of them, च and, नृपपुत्रयोः princes, ब्राह्मणानां for the brahmins, सुराणां च and gods, मुनीनां for sages, वासवस्यच and those who live here. 
4::62::15::इच्छाम desirous, अहं अपि I am also, द्रष्टुं to see, भ्रातरौ रामलक्ष्मणौ brothers Rama and Lakshmana, न not, इच्छा चिरं desire to live long, धारयुतुं to hold on, प्राणान् life, त्यक्ष्ये will give up, कलेबरं my body, महर्षि: sage, तु your, अब्रवीत् said, एवं this, दृष्टः after seeing, तत्वार्थदर्शनः knower of self. 
