3::18::1::ततः then, रामः Rama, कामपाशावपाशिताम् to one who was overcome by lust, शूर्पणखाम् to Surpanakha, स्वच्छया with clear, श्लक्ष्णया with lucid, वाचा with words, स्मितपूर्वम् with a smile, अथ then, अब्रवीत् said.
3::18::2::भवति O Lady, कृतदारः married, अस्मि I am, इयम् this woman, मम myself, दयिता dear, भार्या wife, त्वद्विधानाम् of people like you, नारीणाम् for women, ससपत्नता being a cowife, सुदुःखा very painful.
3::18::3::लक्ष्मणो नाम by name Lakshmana, एषः this man, मे my, अनुजः younger, भ्राता brother, शीलवान् a man of good conduct, प्रियदर्शनः goodlooking, श्रीमान् virtuous,  अकृतदारश्च single, वीर्यवान् heroic.
3::18::4::अपूर्वी not accompanied by his, भार्यया wife, अर्थी a man in need, तरुणः young, प्रियदर्शनः handsome, ते to your, रूपस्य beauty, अनुरूपः worthy of, भर्ता husband, भविष्यति will be.
3::18::5::विशालाक्षि O largeeyed one, वरारोहे  with fine hips, एनम् him, भ्रातरम् my brother, अर्कप्रभा radiance of the Sun, मेरुं यथा like mount Meru, असपत्ना without a cowife, भज serve him.
3::18::6::रामेण by Rama, इति this way, प्रोक्ता having been told, राक्षसी the demoness, काममोहिता deluded with lust, सहसा suddenly, रामम् Rama, विसृज्य leaving, ततः thereafter, लक्ष्मणम् to Lakshmana, अब्रवीत् said.
3::18::7::ते to you, अस्य रूपस्य for your form, वरवर्णिनी a woman of fine complexion, अहम् I am, युक्ता most suitable, भार्या wife, मया सह with me, सुखम् happily, दण्डकान् to Dandaka forest, विचरिष्यसि you can wander about.
3::18::8::राक्षस्या by that demoness, एवम् thus, उक्तः spoken, वाक्यकोविदः wellversed in the use of words, सौमित्रिः son of Sumitra, लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, ततः then, स्मित्वा with a gentle smile, शूर्पणखीम् to Surpanakha, युक्तम् appropriately, अब्रवीत् said.
3::18::9::कमलवणिनि O woman of lotus complexion, दासस्य of a servant, मे myself, भार्या wife, दासी female servant, भवितुम् will become, कथम् how, इच्छसि do you intend to be, सः such Rama, अहम् I am, आर्येण्य to that revered, परवान् dependent upon, भ्रात्रा brother.
3::18::10::विशालाक्षि  largeeyed, अमलवर्णिनी  of clear complexion, त्वम् you, समृद्धार्थस्य lord of great wealth, आर्यस्य to Rama, यवीयसी younger, भार्या wife, सिद्धार्था fulfilled, मुदिता happy, भव you may be.
3::18::11::एषः this man, विरूपाम् deformed, असतीम् unchaste, करालाम् frightful, निर्णतोदरीम् a woman of drooping belly, वृद्धाम् old, एनाम् her, भार्याम् wife, परित्यज्य after discarding, त्वामेव you alone, भजिष्यति he will accept you.
3::18::12::वरवर्णिनि O lady of fair complexion, वरारोहे (lady with beautiful hips)charming, विचक्षणः which wise man, को हि indeed, श्रेष्ठम् best, इदं रूपम् this figure, संत्यज्य giving up, मानुषीषु among females, भावम् love, कुर्यात् how will he have?.
3::18::13::लक्ष्मणेन by Lakshmana, इति thus, उक्ता having spoken, कराला fierce, निर्णतोदरी drooping bellied woman, परिहासाविचक्षणा  capable of making fun, सा that Surpanakha, तद्वचः those words, तथ्यम् to be true, मन्यते presumes
3::18::14::काममोहिता deluded with passion, सा she, सीतया सह with Sita, पर्णशालायाम् in the leafthatched hut, उपविष्टं seated, परन्तपम् tormentor of foes, Rama, दुर्धर्षम् formidable, रामम् Rama, अब्रवीत् said.
3::18::15::विरूपाम् ugly, असतीम् unchaste, करालाम् fiercelooking woman, निर्णतोदरीम् a flatbellied woman, वृद्धाम् aged, एनाम् her, भार्याम् wife, अवष्टभ्य  taking hold , त्वम् you, माम् me, न बहुमन्यसे not honouring me.
3::18::16::तव while you, पश्यतः are seeing, अद्य now, इमाम् this, मानुषीम् to this woman, भक्षयिष्यामि I will eat up, निस्सपत्ना without a cowife, त्वया सह with you, यथासुखम् happily, चरिष्यामि I shall move about.
3::18::17::अलातसदृशेक्षणा a woman of flaming ambercoloured eye, इति this way, उक्त्वा after telling, सुसङ्कृद्धा very angrily, महोल्काम् a giant meteor, रोहिणीमिव as if hurtling towards the constellation Rohini, मृगशाबाक्षीम् the fawneyed lady, अभ्यधावत् rushed towards. 
3::18::18::महाबलः mighty, रामः Rama, कुपितः  enraged, मृत्युपाशप्रतिमामापतन्तीं falling like the noose of death, ताम् her, निगृह्य  restraining, ततः after that, लक्ष्मणम् to Lakshmana, अब्रवीत् said.
3::18::19::सौम्य O handsome one, सौमित्रे Lakshmana, क्रूरैः by the wicked, अनार्यैः by the uncivilised one, कथञ्चन indeed, परिहासः fun, न not, कार्यः proper, कथञ्चित् somehow, जीवतीम् a living lady, वैदेहीम् Sita, पश्य see.
3::18::20::पुरुषव्याघ्र tiger among men, विरूपाम् uncouth, असतीम् unchaste , अतिमत्ताम् passionate, महोदरीम्  big bellied इमां राक्षसीम् this demoness,  विरूपयितुम् to deform, अर्हसि you should.
3::18::21::इति this, उक्तः instructed, महाबलः powerful, लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, क्रुद्धः being angry, रामस्य Rama's, पार्श्वतः by the side, खङ्गम् sword, उद्धृत्य having lifted, तस्याः her, कर्णनासम् ears and nose, चिच्छेद cut off.
3::18::22::घोरा dreadful one, सा शूर्पणखा that Surpanakha, निकृत्तकर्णनासा with her ears and nose cut off, विस्वरम् in a hoarse voice, विनद्य च making a loud noise, यथागतम् in the same way as she came from, वनम् forest, प्रदुद्राव ran away.
3::18::23::विरूपा disfigured, महाघोरा very dreadful, शोणितोक्षिता drenched in blood, सा राक्षसी that demoness, प्रावृषि in rainy season, तोयदः यथा like a cloud, विविधान्  different, नादान् sounds, ननाद released.
3::18::24::घोरदर्शना of frightful look, सा she, बहुधा in many ways, रुधिरम् blood, विक्षरन्ती dripping, बाहू प्रगृह्य holding her arms, गर्जन्ती while roaring, महावनम् great forest, प्रविवेश entered.
3::18::25::ततः after that, विरूपिता a disfigured woman, सा she, राक्षससङ्घसंवृतम् surrounded by demons, जनस्थानगतम्  living in Janasthana, उग्रदर्शनम्  fiercelooking, भ्रातरम् brother, तं खरम् to Khara, उपेत्य approaching, गगनात् from the sky, अशनिः thunderbolt, यथा like that, भूमौ on the ground, पपात fell down.
3::18::26::ततः thereafter, खरस्य to Khara, भगिनी a sister, सा she, भयमोहमूर्छिता  a woman who was wild with fear and delusion, शोणितोक्षिता drenched in blood, वनम् forest, आगतम् reached, सभार्यम् with wife, सलक्ष्मणम् with Lakshmana, राघवम् Rama, आत्मनि at her, विरूपणं च disfigurement, सर्वम् all, शशंस narrated.
