3::25::1::Khara accompanied by his pilot party arrived at the hermitage of Rama, the destroyer of enemies and saw him in fury, standing ready with his bow.
3::25::2::On seeing Rama, Khara held his terribly twanging bow and arrow, stood facing him, and ordered the charioteer to drive towards him.
3::25::3::Commanded by Khara, the charioteer also urged the horses towards the mightyarmed Rama standing alone and wielding the bow. 
3::25::4::Seeing Khara attacking (Rama) all the demon ministers surrounded him  roaring. 
3::25::5::Seated on a chariot in the midst of the demons, Khara looked like the rising Mars in the middle of the stars.
3::25::6::Khara struck Rama of immeasurable prowess with a thousand arrows and roared loudly.
3::25::7::Thereafter all the infuriated demons showered on invincible Rama, wielder of a fierce bow, many kinds of weapons.
3::25::8::Overtaken by anger, the demons continuously hurled at Rama hammers, spears, spikes, barbed missiles, swords and battleaxes.
3::25::9::Very powerful demons like huge clouds roared, eager to kill Rama in war. They ran forward on chariots, horses and tall elephants, looking like  mountain tops.
3::25::10::The battalions of demons sent down streams of arrows on Rama just like clouds  downpour on mountains.
3::25::11::Surrounded by the terrible demons Rama appeared like Lord Siva at dusk with hosts of his retinues arounds.
3::25::12::Rama resisted the weapons released by the demons like the sea, the inflow of river waters.
3::25::13::Rama remained unhurt like a great mountain struck by many glowing thunderbolts. He felt no pain even though his limbs were hit by the dreadful weapons.
3::25::14::Wounded all over the body, bleeding through the wounds caused by weapons, Rama looked like the evening Sun covered with clouds.
3::25::15::Seeing Rama left alone surrounded by many thousands of demons, the gods, ghandarvas and siddhas became very sad.
3::25::16::Thereafter Rama, mighty angry, bent his bow and released hundreds and thousands of unfeathered arrows.
3::25::17::As if sporting, Rama discharged the arrows attached with herons' feathers. The arrows were inescapable, unbearable like that of Yama's staff, that went straight without missing the target.
3::25::18::The arrows like the noose of the god of death released by Rama on the enemy army easily destroyed the lives of the demons.
3::25::19::Rama's arrows pierced the bodies of the demons and drenched in blood, they, looking like burning fire, shone in the sky.
3::25::20::From Rama's bow bent into a cirle, countless fierce arrows able to take the lives of demons were released.
3::25::21::In war Rama cut asunder the bows, flag tops, armour and heads of demons, their shoulders and thighs that were like the trunks of elephants, in their hundreds and thousands.
3::25::22::He killed horses with golden armours yoked to the chariots along with charioteers, elephants along with riders, the cavalry along with their horses and infantry and sent them all to the abode of death.
3::25::23::The bodies of the demons torn into pieces by the very sharp iron arrows and by the arrows called vikarni, they cried and shouted aloud in pitiable voices.
3::25::24::Just like the dried up forest burnt by the fire, the army was totally destroyed by Rama's arrows that pierced into the vital parts of the soldiers.
3::25::25::A few warriors of fierce strength approached Rama and hurled at him very powerful weapons, spears, swords and axes.
3::25::26::Strongarmed Rama attacked them with his arrows and cut off their heads and took their lives.
3::25::27::The heads, armour and bows fell down broken on the ground like trees in the wind gererated by Garuda's wings. 
3::25::28::The rest of the demons hit by the arrows ran desperate towards Khara for refuge.
3::25::29::Pacifying them all, Dusana regathered them again and ran towards Rama like an angry Yama rushing towards Rudra.
3::25::30::Under Dusana's protection, all of them felt relieved from fear and, carrying sal and palm trees and stones as weapons, advanced towards Rama again.
3::25::31::Holding spears, hammers and bows in their hands, the mighty demons rained on Rama weapons like arrows, trees and stones.
3::25::32::The thrilling, fierce, horrifying and horripilating battle again ensued betwen Rama and the demons. 
3::25::33::As the infuriated demons again hurtled towards Rama, filling the quarters and the intermediate directions and raining missiles, Rama aimed at them dazzling gandharvastras, producing a frightening warcry. 
3::25::34::Rama then let out from his bow, stretched round, thousands of arrows that covered all the ten quarters.
3::25::35::The demons, though wounded, could not see whereform the terrible arrows came. They only saw Rama shooting the arrows.
3::25::36::Through the darkness created by the arrows that covered the sky and the Sun, Rama looked as though he was vomitting them.
3::25::37::It seemed as if it all happened at the same time, the entire earth filling with demons seriously injured, slain and fallen down on the ground.
3::25::38::There were bodies of demons pierced and torn, thinned and fallen down, destroyed, broken and cut into pieces scattered in their thousands.
3::25::39::Slain thus by Rama's arrows, the ground was littered with (bodies of) demons with limbs dismembered, headdresses and shoulders cut off, arms, thighs and knees decked with various ornaments amputated, chariots, horses, best of elephants, fans made of the tail of chamari deer (used as an insignia of royalty), umbrellas, several  flags, and weapons like spears, swords, darts, battleaxes and stones crushed into pieces and arrows splintered and scattered all over. The ground looked frightening.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे पञ्चविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyfifth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
