3::4::1::Seeing those two mightyarmed Rama and Lakshmana being carried away by Viradha, Sita started crying loudly:
3::4::2::
3::4::3::The wild bears, tigers and panthers will eat me up here. O best among demons, pray take me and leave both the Kakutsthas. 
3::4::4::On hearing those words of  Sita, both the heroes, Rama and Lakshmana hastened to kill the wicked Viradha.
3::4::5::Lakshmana quickly broke the left and Rama the right shoulder of that dreadful demon.
3::4::6::With both shoulders broken, the demon, looking like a cloud (huge and dark) fell at once on the ground like a mountain split by a thunderbolt.
3::4::7::Striking the demon with fists, knees and feet, both of them smit him  on the bare ground and pulverized him.
3::4::8::Although pierced by arrows, and wounded by the two swords, and pulverized on the ground, the demon did not die.
3::4::9::Seeing the mountainlike Viradha not dying though seriously wounded, illustrious Rama, guaranter of safety from fear said to Lakshmana:
3::4::10::O Lakshmana, best among men, this demon by virtue of his penance cannot be killed with any weapon in war. Therefore, let us bury him.
3::4::11:: Dig a deep pit to bury this demon, dreadful like an elephant and emitting a fearful glow.
3::4::12::Courageous Rama standing there put his foot firmly on the neck of Viradha and said to Lakshmana,' Dig up a crevice'.
3::4::13::When the demon Viradha heard Rama saying so, he said these humble words to the scion of the Kakutsthas and the best of men :
3::4::14::You have killed me, O Rama, a tiger among men. You are equal to Indra in prowess. O best of men, out of delusion I could not recognise you earlier.
3::4::15:: O dear Rama, I know now you are the blessed son of Kausalya, Sita is a noble lady and a glorious soul.
3::4::16::I am Tumburu by name,  a celestial singer of the gandharva clan. Cursed by Kubera, I got this dreadful body of a demon.
3::4::17::When I appealed to him, that lord of great fame (Kubera) said that I would get back my original form and ascend to heaven when Rama, son of Dasaratha, would kill me in a duel.
3::4::18:: When king Kubera saw me absent (from duty) as I was infatuated with Rambha, he got angry and cursed me.
3::4::19::O scorcher of enemies by your grace I am rid of the curse. Delivered from my dreadful form, I will now go to my world. May both of you fare well.
3::4::20::O dear, there lives Sarabhanga, a righteous sage, comparable to the Sun, at a distance of one and a half yojanas from here. Go to him at once. He will bless you with your wellbeing.
3::4::21::Bury me in the pit, O Rama, and proceed happily. This is a great tradition for the dead demons. Those who are buried in the pit attain heaven.
3::4::22::Having said so to Rama, the mighty  Viradha, hit by the arrows left his body and attained heaven.
3::4::23::When Rama heard those words, he said, O Lakshmana dig for this elephantlike demon of dreadful acts, a big pit. Having said so the mighty Rama stood firmly stamping the neck of Viradha with his foot.
3::4::24::Then Lakshmana fetched a spade and dug a sufficiently big pit by the side of the great soul Viradha.
3::4::25::Rama took his foot off Viradha's neck and dropped his body with pointed ears into the pit while Viradha was groaning fearfully৷৷
3::4::26::Rama and Lakshmana, stable and firm, brave and quick, together lifted the body of Viradha who was fierce in battle and roaring and forcibly threw it into the pit with joy. 
3::4::27::The two princes, bulls among men, who were adept in archery saw that the great demon could not be killed by any other means. They reflected over the issue  and undertook the task of killing him with sharp weapons and buried him in a pit.
3::4::28::Rama deliberately wanted to kill Viradha with weapons. Viradha the forestranger himself revealed that it was not possible to kill him with weapons and asked Rama to bury him in a pit.
3::4::29::While Rama, who had made up his mind after hearing him, was putting the mighty demon in the pit, the forest rang with his roar.
3::4::30::Rama and Lakshmana were happy to consign Viradha's body to the pit after killing him. They filled the pit with rocks in the great forest without fear.
3::4::31::With Viradha killed, they, accompanied by Sita, wandered happily in the dense forest, carrying their brilliant bows adorned with molten gold. They looked like Moon and Sun shining in the sky.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे चतुर्थस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fourth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
