3::54::1::While Sita was being kidnapped, she saw no one to protect her. Only five great monkeys stood on the top of a mountain.
3::54::2::Largeeyed, bright and beautiful Sita dropped her upper silk garment shining like gold and auspicious ornaments in their midst with a hope they may report this  to Rama.
3::54::3::In his excitement Ravana failed to notice when Sita dropped down that garment along with ornaments in their midst.
3::54::4::The best among the tawneyeyed monkeys gazed, without blinking, at the  largeeyed Sita lamenting.
3::54::5::Ravana crossed the lake Pampa and flew towards the city of Lanka carrying with him lamenting daughter of Videha.
3::54::6::Delighted Ravana, carried off Sita, the very embodiment of his death, like one carrying a highly poisonous sharpfanged female snake on his lap.
3::54::7::Like an arrow released from the bow, Ravana went through the sky, at once crossing forests, rivers mountains and tanks.
3::54::8::Ravana soon crossed the refuge of rivers, the abode of Varuna, god of the sea, inexhaustible ocean, and the home for whales and crocodiles.
3::54::9::While Sita, princess of Videha was being carried away, the ocean, abode of Varuna  got bewildered, waves rolled back, the movement of big serpents and fishes stopped. 
3::54::10::The charanas and siddhas moving in the sky said, O tenheaded Ravana this is your  end .
3::54::11::Ravana entered the city of Lanka holding Sita who was tossing from side to side and who was the very embodiment of his death.
3::54::12::Ravana went through the well laidout roads of the city of Lanka and through the well many guarded halls of the palace and entered the inner apartment.
3::54::13::Sita, with her dark eye lashes and lost in utter sorrow was kept in the harem by Ravana, like demon Maya kept Mayamayi.
3::54::14::Ravana ordered the female goblins of fearful appearance,'Let no outsider whether man or woman, see her, without my permission'.
3::54::15::Pearls, gems or gold, clothes or ornaments, whatever she desires, be made available to her without any hesitation.
3::54::16::Whoever utters any unpleasant words knowingly or unknowingly to Sita, princess of Videha is not worthy to survive (must be killed).
3::54::17::The courageous lord of the demons, having said so to the demonesses, came out of the inner apartment. While contemplating the future course of action, he saw eight powerful, carnivorous demons. 
3::54::18::The mighty Ravana, deluded by the boons, praised the strength and valour of the demons and said :
3::54::19::Armed with different weapons, proceed at once to Janasthana where Khara lived and died.
3::54::20::Go and there in the desolate Janasthana where all demons had been killed, leaving all your apprehensions and relying on your strength and vigour.
3::54::21::I had stationed a great army at Janasthana, who were all killed along with Khara and Dusana by Rama's arrows.
3::54::22::My anger engineered by my intolerance has crossed the limits of my patience. It has created in me a terrific enmity against Rama.
3::54::23::I want to take revenge on my foe. I shall not sleep until I kill him in a combat.
3::54::24::I will be happy only after killing the destroyer of Khara and Dusana, just as a poor man feels happy only on acquiring wealth.
3::54::25::While dwelling at Janasthana, all of you should collect exact information about the activities of Rama.
3::54::26::All of you, O nightrangers, should be on the alert there and it should be always your duty to try to kill Rama.
3::54::27::I have seen your strength on many war fronts. That is why you have been assigned this  duty at Janasthana.
3::54::28::The eight demons were glad to hear the pleasing and meaningful words of Ravana. They offered him salutations and left Lanka in the direction of Janasthana without being seen by any one.
3::54::29::Then the demon Ravana felt greatly happy for getting Sita, princess of Mithila, without knowing in his delusion that he had created the bitterest enmity with Rama.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वामलीकीये आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे चतुःपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyfourth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
