3::15::1::On reaching Panchavati, which was full of various vicious animals, Rama said to Lakshmana, his brother who was glowing like  fire:
3::15::2::O handsome one, following the directions of the great sage, we have arrived at Panchavati, a place full of blossoming trees.
3::15::3::O Lakshmana cast your eyes all around the forest for a suitable place (for building a hermitage).  Indeed, you are good at judging things.
3::15::4::Look, O Lakshmana  for a place to the liking of Sita, a place where there is water source nearby  where both of us can enjoy. Find a beautiful location where the surrounding forest is beautiful and where faggots, flowers, water and kusa grass are available at hand.
3::15::5::Having been thus instructed by Rama, Lakshmana said with folded palms in the presence of Sita:
3::15::6::O Rama, I shall be dependent on you, even if I live for a hundred years. You only need to indicate a beautiful place of your choice. 
3::15::7:: Rama was pleased with the words of great Lakshmana. Deliberating over it, he agreed upon a site suitable in all respects.
3::15::8::Having come to a beautiful spot suitable for the asram, Rama took both the hands of  Lakshmana in his own and said:
3::15::9::This place is level, surrounded by beautiful trees in full bloom. O handsome one, you may build the hermitage here.
3::15::10::There, not very far, is a beautiful lotustank shining like the Sun, fragrant with lotuses.
3::15::11::As said by the selfrealised soul, sage Agastya, this Godavari is beautiful, surrounded by trees with flowers in bloom, filled with flocks of swans, ducks and ruddy geese.
3::15::12::O handsome one, neither far nor near are seen tall mountains and flowering trees and herds of deer. Their numerous caves echo with sounds of peacocks.
3::15::13::These mountains, with streaks of minerals like gold, silver and copper forming decorative designs, look beautiful like colourful windows, and appear like huge elephants.
3::15::14::The place is covered with  sal and palmyrah trees including mango, jackfruit, dates, kadamba, punnaga, ashoka, champak, tilaka, ketaka, sandalwood, spandan, dhava, asvakarna parnasha, khadira, sami, kimsuka and patala trees. It is full of wild paddy, flowering bushes and creepers that run on the ground.
3::15::15::This is a holy place fit for sacrifice. There are many animals and birds here.Hence we will reside here with Jatayu.
3::15::16::Thus directed by Rama, the mighty Lakshmana, destroyer  of enemy warriors, soon built a hermitage for his brother.
3::15::17::Lakshmana who was quick to act dug the clay with nippers, planted long bamboo poles, put branches of sami trees across and tied them with strong ropes. He spread kusa and kasa grass and leaves on the levelled ground. He built a beautiful, spacious and nice residence for Rama.
3::15::18::Lakshmana then went to river Godavari, had his bath, and returned with some lotuses.
3::15::19::Lakshmana offered oblation of flowers, invoked peace as per tradition (before occupying a newly made home) and showed Rama the cottage he had built.
3::15::20::Rama and Sita saw the beautiful hermitage built by Lakshmana, and expressed much happiness over the leafthatched cottage. 
3::15::21::Deeply pleased with Lakshmana, he hugged him tightly and said those loving words :
3::15::22:: O my master, you have done a great task for which I have given you what I could give at the moment a hug.
3::15::23::O Lakshmana with a son like you who can understand others' feelings, who has a sense of gratitude and a sense of duty my father is not dead yet.
3::15::24::Rama who was an enhancer of fortunes and who had his senses under control said thus to Lakshmana and lived happily there in that place filled with fruits.
3::15::25::Righteous Rama, served by Lakshmana, and Sita lived there for some time like a god in heaven. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे पञ्चदशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fifteenth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
