3::39::1::I was somehow saved by him this way in the combat.Listen without any reply to what has taken place recently.
3::39::2::Having done so, I picked up courage and entered Dandaka forest, accompanied by the two other demons in the form of deer .
3::39::3::I wandered in Dandaka forest in the form of a huge animal with a big and strong body, a flaming red tongue and sharp teeth feeding on flesh.
3::39::4::O Ravana, assuming a very dreadful form, I wandered about sacrificial spots, sacred places, river banks, under huge trees planted at quadranglestorturing the ascetics.
3::39::5::I wandered  about the Dandaka forest slaying righteous ascetics, drinking their blood and eating their flesh.
3::39::6::While thus roaming, I harmed the wanderers of the forest. Intoxicated with their blood I used to frighten the righteous. 
3::39::7::I encountered again the righteous Rama who was in the form of an ascetic, with venerable Sita and the great warrior Lakshmana.
3::39::8::Although Rama was very strong, he was living on restricted diet, engaged in the welfare of all beings. Treating him as a mere ascetic living in the forest, remembering my past hostility with him and disregarding his (fatal) blow, I ran towards him angrily, assuming the form of a sharphorned animal with an intention to kill him.
3::39::9::His mighty bow drawn, Rama released three sharp darts that came whizzing like Garuda or the wind. They could destroy the enemy.
3::39::10::All the three tightly jointed, welltargetted darts, strong as thunderbolt, and which could feed on blood came together all at once.
3::39::11::Having known Rama's prowess earlier and experienced tremendous fear, I ran away in a bewildered state as I was deceitful. The other two demons (who had accompanied me) succumbed. 
3::39::12::With my escape from Rama's darts I somehow got a fresh lease of life. Now I am composed. I have started living the life of a recluse here. I have turned an ascetic.
3::39::13::I see Rama in every tree, clad in bark and deerskin, wielding the bow, holding a noose in hand like the god of death.
3::39::14::O Ravana I see in my fear thousands of Ramas. The entire forest appears to me as though filled with Rama.
3::39::15::O king of the demons  I see only Rama even in solitude. When I see him in a dream  I lose my senses in a state of bewilderment.
3::39::16::O Ravana, every name beginning with the letter 'Ra', such as Ratna (gems), Ratha (chariot), etc. strike terror in me.
3::39::17::I know his power.It is not proper to wage a war with him. Rama, delight of the Raghu dynasty, can slay even Bali or Namuchi.
3::39::18::Missing
3::39::19::There were many pious men in this world who practise yoga and dharma .They have been destroyed along with their retinue due to mistakes committed by others.
3::39::20::O demon   As such, I will perish due to your offence. You may do anything you deem appropriate. I will not follow you.
3::39::21::Rama is brilliant, powerful and strong. I hope he will not be the god of death for the world of demons.
3::39::22::For the sake of Surpanakha, Khara of Janasthana committed excesses and got killed by Rama who can accomplish things with ease.Tell me truly if Rama did violate anything here.
3::39::23::If you do not follow my advice given for the welfare of our kith and kin, O Ravana, you are killed today. With your relations you will succumb to his straightmoving arrows.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे एकोनचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyninth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
