3::52::1::Sita,whose face was like the lord of the stars (Moon), saw Jatayu, king of birds, struck down by Ravana, and lamented in extreme grif :
3::52::2::People, for sure, foresee weal and woe in life from auspicious symptoms and ominous sounds.
3::52::3::O Rama you are, indeed, unaware of the great disaster that has befallen you. All the animals and birds are running for my sake to tell you about me, O scion  of the Kakutsthas. 
3::52::4::'This bird that came forward to save me is hit by the sinner(Ravana) and lies down on the ground, as ill luck would have it.
3::52::5::Terribly frightened, the beautiful lady (Sita) cried bitterly, 'O Rama, O Lakshmana, save me', as if they were close by and were listening to her.
3::52::6::Ravana, king of the demons, ran towards Sita who was weeping like an orphan with her garlands and ornaments crushed.
3::52::7::Separated from Rama in the forest, Sita hugged huge trees, running round and round like a creeper coiled, crying loudly, 'Rama, O Rama' . The king of the demons, like Yama, caught hold of her hair only to invite his death, all the time saying, Leave it, Leave it  (Leave the tree).
3::52::8::While Sita was being assaulted, the earth with the animate and the inanimate crossed all limits of moral law and became enveloped in blinding darkness. The wind  ceased to blow and the Sun, to shine.
3::52::9::Brahma, the glorious Grandfather, saw with his divine eyes, Sita in a desperate state caught by the enemy and said, 'The task is accomplished.
3::52::10::All the great seers residing in Dandaka forest felt both happy and sad, happy because the destruction of Ravana is at hand and sad because Sita was in distress.
3::52::11::While Sita was crying, 'O Rama, O Lakshmana', Ravana, lord of the demons, carried her back into the sky.
3::52::12::SIta who had put on pure gold ornaments on her body and who was clad in yellow silk  shone like lightning.
3::52::13::Ravana was shining all the more with(her) yellow clothes blowing in the air, and looked like a mountain shining with fire burning around.
3::52::14::The red lotus petals worn by the most auspicious Sita, princess of Videha, were showered on Ravana.
3::52::15::As the goldencoloured garment worn by Sita blew in the wind, it looked like a coppercoloured cloud illumined by the evening Sun in the sky.
3::52::16::Sita's face with her beautiful nose on Ravana's lap and not on Rama's, shone no more like a lotus without its stalk.
3::52::17::Sita's face looked beautiful with her smooth forehead, shining hair and spotless complexion like the inside of a lotus, with clean, white, shining teeth, a nice nose and lovely red lips. She was continuously weeping and wiping her tears. Her face which was pleasing like the Moon on the lap of Ravana appeared as though the Moon was rising through dark clouds.
3::52::18::Shaken up by the demon and deprived of Rama's company, Sita's beautiful face looked like the Moon during daytime without any glow.
3::52::19::Goldencomplexioned Sita, princess of Mithila, held by the darkcoloured king of the demons, shone like a girdle resting on a dark blue sapphire.
3::52::20::Bright like a golden lotus, adorned with gold ornaments, Sita, the daughter of Janaka, held by Ravana, looked like a streak of lightning shining bright in a dark cloud.
3::52::21::The lord of the demons by the side of Sita, princess of Videha with her jingling ornaments looked like the darkblue raincloud with its lightning and thunder.
3::52::22::As Sita was being carried away, the shower of flowers dropped from her head and scattered on the earth.
3::52::23::The shower of flowers that fell flew towards the tenheaded Ravana again in the swirling motion (of the chariot).
3::52::24::The shower of flowers that dropped went round towards Ravana, brother of Vaisravana, like the bright garland of stars move towards mount Meru.
3::52::25::The gemstudded anklet of Sita, looking like an orb of lightning, dropped with a gentle sound.
3::52::26::With her golden girdle, Sita whose complexion resembled tender leaves looked like a golden chain to bind an elephant with. (Here Ravana is the elephant).
3::52::27::The younger brother of Vaisravana (Ravana), like a massive comet, carried Sita, who was glowing in the radiance of her own beauty, and entered the sky.
3::52::28::Like the dim stars falling from the sky, her ornaments, bright as flame, scattered on the groundtinkling.
3::52::29::Sita's necklace shining like the bright Moon slipped from between her breasts like the river Ganga falling down from the sky.
3::52::30::The trees filled with birds of all kinds, shaken at the top by stormy winds seemed to be saying to Sita, 'Be not afraid'.
3::52::31::Lotusponds with withering lotuses and with disturbed aquatic life like fishes in fright were as if grieving for Sita as one would grieve for a companion who is unable to breathe.
3::52::32::Then the lions, tigers, deer and birds gathered together in anger (also anguish) and ran after Sita's shadow.
3::52::33::The  mountains were  shedding tears in the form of waterfalls, and  crying with hands lifted up in the form of peaks, while Sita was being carried away.
3::52::34::Seeing Sita abducted, the glorious Sun looked lustreless and distraught. He developed a pale white disk around him.
3::52::35::When Rama's consort, the princess of Videha, is being carried away by Ravana, how can there be rightousness or truth or uprightness or compassion for men? Thus bewailed all beings in groups.
3::52::36::The young deer full of fear and distress looked again and again with eyes blurred with tears at the direction in which Sita went. And wept.
3::52::37::The  sylvan deities shivered, seeing Sita's grief and cried aloud.
3::52::38::The ten headed Ravana abducted Sita who was calling out, O Rama, O Lakshmana with her sweet voice, weeping , looking down on the earth her hair dishevelled and auspicious, (vermilion) mark on the forehead erased. Ravana abducted this highminded Sita for his own destruction.
3::52::39::Then Sita  whose teeth were  beautiful and smile, sweet was distanced from her kins, and, unable to see both Rama and Lakshmana, grew pale in intense fear.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे द्विपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftysecond sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
