3::44::1::The brilliant Rama, delight of the Raghu dynasty, thus instructed his brother and fastened a sword with a golden handle to his waist.
3::44::2::A man of indomitable prowess, he took the bow with three curves that was like an ornament to him, tied two quivers at the back and left.
3::44::3::On seeing Rama approaching him, the deer disappeared due to fear and again came within sight. With his sword and the bow, Rama chased wherever the deer ran.
3::44::4::Rama, wielder of the bow, saw that splendid animal ahead of him. Holding the bow he saw the deer running away, bewldered into the great forest looking at him again and again. The deer was getting out of the range of his arrow, while it enticed him now and then. Suspecting that he might be caught,  the deer was, as though jumping into the sky. Now it came within sight and now out of sight in the huge forest. It looked like the autumnal moon surrounded by clouds. (The clouds muffle the Moon and reveal him now and then). 
3::44::5::Maricha, transformed into a deer, was seen now near, now faroff. He pulled Rama away from the hermitage through his exits and entrances.
3::44::6::Deluded by that deer, Rama got tired, perplexed and angry. Then bewidered, he waited on a grassland under a shade.
3::44::7::That demon transformed himself into a deer and, surrounded by the animals of the forest at close range, attracted his attention.
3::44::8::Seeing Rama's  intention to catch him, the deer ran away once again out of fear and disappeared in a moment.
3::44::9::Resplendent Rama saw the deer coming out of a cluster of trees at a distance and determined to kill him.
3::44::10::Powerful Rama, destroyer of foes, lifted in a rage his arrow blazing like the light of  the Sun, strung it to his sturdy bow and drew it with all his force. He then aimed at the deer and released the shining  arrow created by Brahma which went hissing like a  serpent.
3::44::11::The great arrow which was like a thunderbolt first pierced into the body of Maricha who had assumed the form of a deer and then tore his heart.
3::44::12::And, hurt by the dart, Maricha roared frighteningly, leaped as high as a  palm tree  and dropped down on earth almost dead.
3::44::13::Maricha gave up his false form of the deer and before breathing his last, remembered the words of Ravana. He thought over the means through which Sita could send Lakshmana to this spot so that  Ravana would abduct her when she is alone.
3::44::14::Then Maricha realised that the appropriate time had come. In a voice similar to Rama's, he shouted loudly 'Alas Sita, Alas Lakshmana '
3::44::15::Struck in the vital part by Rama's matchless dart, Maricha gave up the form of the deer and assumed his huge body of the demon.
3::44::16::Seeing that terrific demon fallen on the ground, drenched in blood, and strring his limbs, Rama thought of Lakshmana's words and reached Sita mentally (thought of her).  
3::44::17::This is an illusion created by Maricha. It happened exactly the way Lakshmana had said earlier. Maricha is now killed.
3::44::18::This demon Maricha screamed aloud saying, 'Alas, Sita, Alas, Lakshmana'. He is now dead. How would Sita react to this voice? What would be the condition of Lakshmana? While righteous Rama reflected on this, his hair stood on end.
3::44::19::After killing the demon in the figure of a deer and hearing his voice, Rama was overtaken by intense fear born of despair.
3::44::20::Then Rama killed another deer, collected the venison and hastened to Janasthana.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे चतुश्चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।Thus ends the fortyfourth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
