3::10::1::Having heard these words spoken by Sita who was devoted to her husband, replied Rama who was firm in righteousness.
3::10::2::O daughter of Janaka, you are conversant with dharma. Whatever you have admonished out of affection for me is befitting your race.
3::10::3::But permit me, Devi, you have already stated, when a kshatriya holds a bow there will be no cry of distress. (it means you approve of my holding a bow)
3::10::4::O Sita, the sages who perform rigorous penance in Dandaka forest came to me personally, seeking shelter although they can be their own protection.
3::10::5::The sages living in the forest, eating roots and fruits and ever engaged in righteous activities are afraid of the depredations of the demons, with their happiness gone.
3::10::6::The sages engrossed in various austerities in the forest have been victims to the dreadful demons living on human flesh.
3::10::7::The ascetics, the best of brahmins living in Dandaka forest being eaten up like that besought me to come to their rescue.
3::10::8::On hearing the words that came from their mouth, I bowed at their feet and said:
3::10::9::Be pleased  That brahmins like you have approached me while I should have come to you has put me to shame immeasurable .
3::10::10::I enquired about what I could do for them. And all the brahmins in one voice said:.
3::10::11::'O Rama, the demons who can assume any form at their will are mercilessly tormenting us in Dandaka forest. Do protect us from them'.
3::10::12::'O sinless one, these cannibals are invincible. They arrive at the time of our sacrificial rituals, on the days of festivities or at the time of lunar conjunctions like no moon or full moon days and attack us.
3::10::13::'You are the supreme refuge for us ascetics, tormented by demons, helpless men in search of shelter.
3::10::14::
3::10::15::'O Rama it is difficult to perform penance which is ever full of obstacles. Therefore, we do not pronounce curses even if eaten up by demons'.
3::10::16:: 'The demons, dwelling in the Dandaka forest are tormenting us. You alone are our lord in the forest. Do protect us with your brother.'
3::10::17::O daughter of Janaka, on hearing the words of the sages I promised to undertake the entire protection of sages of the Dandaka forest.
3::10::18::Having promised the sages, I cannot do otherwise as long as I have life in me. To me truth is always dear.
3::10::19:: O Sita I may forfeit my life forsake, even Lakshmana and you but will not break the promise made specially to the brahmins৷৷
3::10::20::Even before the sages requested me I should have protected them. What to speak of the promise I have already made ?
3::10::21::O sinless one all that has been said by you is out of your love and affection for me. I am pleased. What is harmful is never advised.
3::10::22::Your auspicious words are quite befitting your lineage. You are the follower of my dharma and so dearer to me than my life.
3::10::23::Having said this to Sita, the princess of Mithila, Rama along with Lakshmana, bow in hand, moved about the delightful penancegrove.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे दशमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the tenth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by the sage Valmiki.
