3::34::1::Incensed at the harsh words Surpanakha used in the midst of ministers, Ravana said:
3::34::2::Who is Rama? What is his strength? How does he look? How valiant is he? For what purpose has he entered the impenetrable Dandaka forest?
3::34::3::With what weapons he has killed demons like Khara, Dusana and Trisira ? 
3::34::4::Thus questioned by Ravana, the demoness, overcome by anger, began telling him about Rama faithfully:
3::34::5::Rama, Dasaratha's son, has long arms, large eyes. He is clad in deerskin and bark. He resembles Cupid.
3::34::6::His bow resembles Indra's, He is adorned with gold bands. Drawing the bow, he releases glittering arrows like highly poisonous snakes.
3::34::7::I could not see Rama in the dreadful war while he was pulling an arrow from the quiver, aiming the dart, and drawing the bowstring.
3::34::8::Just as Indra destroys the crop ready for harvest by raining hailstones, I have seen Rama killing the army with a shower of arrows.
3::34::9::Fighting alone on foot with his sharp arrows Rama killed within a span of one and a half muhurta, the fourteen thousand dreadful demons including Dusana and Khara.
3::34::10::Sages have been assured safety. Peace has been restored to Dandaka forest. As Rama, the great soul, who knows the self, hesitated to kill a woman, I was alone saved after this humiliation.
3::34::11::His brother called Lakshmana looks radiant. He is virtuous and courageous like him, valiant, devoted and loyal.
3::34::12::He is impatient, invincible, victorious, bold, intelligent and strong. He is even the right hand of Rama, his outer life.
3::34::13::Rama's beloved consort is a largeeyed lady. Her face is like the full moon. She is engaged in the wellbeing of her husband.
3::34::14::She is an illustrious lady. She is goodlooking with her long hair, wellshaped nose and things. She appears to be the presiding deity of the forest, another goddess of wealth (Laxmi).
3::34::15::She is Sita, princess of Videha, a virtuous lady of golden complexion, a beautiful lady of slender waist and heavy hips.
3::34::16::I had not seen such a beautiful woman earlier, among the gandharvas, or yakshas, or kinneras. I have not seen such a beauty among the humans on earth.
3::34::17::Whosoever gets Sita as his wife, whoever she embraces happily will wish to live longer than Indra, the breaker of fortresses in this world.
3::34::18::She is a woman of good conduct, of praiseworthy beauty. She is matchless in her beauty on earth. She will be a suitable wife for you and you, a suitable husband for her.
3::34::19::O mightyarmed one  I have been disfigured by cruel Lakshmana as I was attempting to bring that lady of broad thighs, pointed breasts, heavy hips and a beautiful face to make her your wife.
3::34::20::If you see her today, this lady with a face like the fullmoon, you will (instantaneously) fall a victim to the arrows of the god of love. 
3::34::21::If you intend her to be your wife, raise your right foot now and proceed to win her over.
3::34::22::O lord of the demons, do a favour to your clan by  killing that cruel Rama dwelling in the hermitage.
3::34::23:: Kill Rama, that great warrior along with Lakshmana with sharp arrows and enjoy the  company of Sita happily as you like, with her husband dead.
3::34::24::If you like what I have said, do accordingly without any hesitation, O Ravana, lord of the demons.
3::34::25:: Assess your own strength, O Lord of the demons, before you forcefully abduct that delicate Sita who is charming in all respects and make her your wife.
3::34::26::On hearing about the death of the demons including Khara and Dusana who fell to the straight and swift arrows of Rama, you should decide your course of action.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे चतुस्त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtytfourth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
