3::51::1::जटायुषा by Jatayu, यथान्यायम् justly, इति in this manner, उक्तस्य  told, क्रुद्धस्य of the enraged, रावणस्य Ravana's, सर्वाः all, विंशतिदृष्टयः twenty eyes, अग्निनिभाः like fire, रेजुः glowed.
3::51::2::तप्तकाञ्चनकुण्डलः bright gold earrings, अमर्षणः intolerant, राक्षसेन्द्रः king of demons, कोपात् in anger, संरक्तनयनः eyes turned red, पतगेन्द्रम् to lord of birds (Jatayu), अभिदुद्राव leaped.
3::51::3::तस्मिन् in that, महावने in the huge forest, तयोः between them, तुमुलः tumultuous, सः सम्प्रहारः fight, गगने in the sky, वातोद्धतयोः stormy wind that arose, मेघयोर्यथा like two flakes of clouds, बभूव appeared.
3::51::4::तदा then, (तयोः of both of them), गृध्रराक्षसयोः vulture and demon, तत् that, अद्भुतम् wonderful, युद्धम् war, सपक्षयोः of the winged ones, माल्यवतोः of Malyavan range, महापर्वतयोरिव between two huge mountains, बभूव took place.
3::51::5::ततः then,महाबलः mighty, तीक्ष्णाग्रैः with sharp tips, महाघोरैः dreadful, नालीकनाराचैः by spears and shafts, विकर्णिभिः a weapon named Vikarni, गृध्रराजम्  king of vultures, अभ्यवर्षत् rained.
3::51::6::पत्ररथेश्वरः lord of birds, गृध्रः vulture, जटायुः Jatayu, संयुगे in encounter, तानि those, शरजालानि all the arrows, रावणास्त्राणि Ravana's weapons, प्रतिजग्राह endured.
3::51::7::महाबलः very strong, पतगसत्तमः virtuous vulture, तीक्ष्णनखाभ्याम् with sharp claws, चरणाभ्याम् with both feet, तस्य his, गात्रे on the limbs, बहुधा many ways, व्रणान् wounds, चकार pierced.
3::51::8::अथ at that time, दशग्रीवः the tenheaded Ravana, क्रोधात् enraged, शत्रुमर्दनकाङ्क्षया with a desire to crush the enemy, मृत्युदण्डनिभान् like the staff of death, घोरान् fierce, दश मार्गणान् ten darts, जग्राह unleashed.
3::51::9::महावीर्यः mighty, सः he, पूर्णमुक्तै: fully released, अजिह्मगैः going straight, निशितैः whetted, तीक्ष्णै with sharp, घोरैः dreadful, शिलीमुखैः with arrows, तैः those, बाणैः arrows, गृध्रम् at the vulture, बिभेद pierced.
3::51::10::सः that, राक्षसरथे on the demon's chariot, बाष्पलोचनाम् eyes filled with tears, जानकीम् Sita, daughter of Janaka, पश्यन् observing, तान् those, बाणान् arrows, अचिन्तयित्वा without minding, राक्षसम् to the demon, समभिद्रवत् attacked again.
3::51::11::ततः then, महातेजाः glorious, पतगेश्वरः lord of birds, अस्य his, मुक्तामणिविभूषितम् encrusted with pearls and gems, सशरम् along with that arrow, चापम् bow, चरणाभ्याम् with his feet, बभञ्ज broke.
3::51::12::ततः then, रावणः Ravana, क्रोधमूर्छितः overcome with anger, अन्यत् other, धनुः bow, आदाय after taking, शतशः hundreds of, अथ and, सहस्रशः in thousands, शरवर्षाणि rain of arrows, ववर्ष rained.
3::51::13::तदा then, संयुगे in the encounter, तस्य his, शरैः  arrows, आवारितः surrounded, पतगेश्वरः Jatayu, कुलायम् nest of the bird, उपसम्प्राप्तः returned, पक्षीव resemled the bird, प्रबभौ shone.
3::51::14::महातेजाः powerful, सः Jatayu, तानि those, शरवर्षाणि rain of arrows, पक्षाभ्याम् by the wings, विधूय च on scattering, अस्य his, महत् great, धनुः bow, चरणाभ्याम् with claws, बभञ्ज broke.
3::51::15::महावीर्यः mighty, सः Jatayu, पतगेश्वरः lord of the birds, रावणस्य Ravana's, अग्निसदृशम् burning like fire, दीप्तम् glowing, तत् that, शरावरम् armour, पक्षाभ्याम् with the wings, व्याधुनोत् tore asunder.
3::51::16::बली powerful, काञ्चनोरश्छदान् golden shield, दिव्यान् splendid, पिशाचवदनान् devil's face, जवसम्पन्नान् endowed with great speed, तान् those, खरान् च asses, समरे in the combat, जघान killed.
3::51::17::वरम् excellent, त्रिवेणुसम्पन्नम् endowed with three bamboo reeds, कामगम् go wherever one desired, पावकार्चिषम् glowing like fire, मणिहेमविचित्राङ्गम् glittering with gold and gems, महारथम् great chariot, बभञ्ज broke.
3::51::18::पूर्णचन्द्रप्रतीकाशम् shining like the full moon, छत्रं च parasol also, व्यजनैः सह with  the fans, ग्राहिभिः with those holding them, राक्षसैः सह along with the demons, वेगेन violently, पातयामास pulled down.
3::51::19::पुनः again, महाबलः powerful, श्रीमान् glorious, पक्षिराजः king of the birds, अस्य his, सारथेः charioteer, महत् huge, शिरः head, वेगेन तुण्डेनैव violently with the beak, व्यपाहरत् shattered.
3::51::20::भग्नधन्वा with the bow broken, विरथः chariot destroyed, हताश्वः asses (drawing the chariot) dead, हतसारथिः charioteer killed, सः रावणः that Ravana, वैदेहीम् Vaidehi, अङ्केन on his lap, आदाय held, भुवि on to the ground, पपात fell.
3::51::21::भग्नवाहनम् with the broken chariot, भूमौ on the ground, निपतितम् fallen down, रावणम् Ravana, दृष्ट्वा  seeing, साधु साधु इति staying well done, well done, भूतानि all beings, गृध्रराजम् king of the birds, अपूजयन् honoured.
3::51::22::पक्षियूथपम् the lord of the flocks of birds (Jatayu), तम् him, जरया with old age, परिश्रान्तम् exhausted (after a long fight), दृष्ट्वा seeing, रावणः Ravana, हृष्टः glad, मैथिलीम् Maithili, गृह्य took, पुनः again, उत्पपात flew into the sky.
3::51::23::गृध्रराजः king of the vultures, महातेजाः mighty, जटायुः Jatayu, समुत्पत्य flew up.प्रहृष्टम् happy, जनकात्मजाम् Janaka's daughter ( Sita), अङ्के on the lap, निथाय placed, गच्छन्तम् while going, तं रावणम् to that Ravana, समभिद्रुत्य chased, समावार्य obstructing, इदम् this, अब्रवीत् said.
3::51::24::अल्पबुद्धे foolish, रावण Ravana, वज्रसंस्पर्शबाणस्य whose arows can hit like a thunderbolt, रामस्य Rama's, भार्याम् wife, एनाम् this lady, रक्षसाम् of demons, वधाय for destruction, हरसि  kidnapping.
3::51::25::मित्रबन्धुः along with kith and kin, सामात्यः with ministers, सबलः with army, सपरिच्छदः with all your allies, पिपासितः thirsty man, उदकमिव like water, एतत् this, विषपानम् poison, पिबसि you  are drinking.
3::51::26::कर्मणाम् of the deeds, अनुबन्धम् consequences, अजानन्तः not knowing, अविचक्षणाः unwise, यथा similarly, श्रीघ्रमेव soon, विनश्यन्ति get destroyed, त्वम् you, विनशिष्यसि will be destroyed.
3::51::27::त्वम् you, कालपाशेन by the noose of death, वधाय to die, बद्धः are bound, सामिषम् with a bait, बडिशम् fishhook, गृह्य having taken, जलजः fish, यथा so also, तस्य its, क्व गतः where can it go, मोक्ष्यसे will you get out.
3::51::28::रावण Ravana, दुराधर्षौ both invincible, काकुत्स्थौ both Kakutsthas, राघवौ Rama and Lakshmana, तव your, अस्य आश्रमस्य their hermitage, धर्षणम् assault, जातु surely, न क्षमिष्येते not forgive.
3::51::29::भीरुणा by a timid, त्वया you are, यथा like this, लोकगर्हितम् condemned by the whole world, कर्म  act, कृतम् is done, तस्कराचरितः adopted by thieves, मार्गः this path, वीरनिषेवितः followed by heroes, नैव not at all.
3::51::30::रावण Ravana, यदि if you, शूरोऽसि are courageous, युध्यस्व may fight, मुहूर्तं for a moment, तिष्ठ stay, भ्राता brother, खर: Khara, तथा likewise, शयिष्यसे all down, यथा as, भूमौ on the ground, हत: killed.
3::51::31::पुरुषः man, परेतकाले at the time of death, यत् whatever, कर्म actions, प्रतिपद्यते does, अधर्म्यम् unrighteous, तत् such, कर्म action, आत्मनः yourself, विनाशाय for destruction, प्रतिपन्नः  undertaken, असि you are.
3::51::32::यस्य by whomsoever, कर्मणः action, पापानुबन्धः resulting in sin, तत् such, कर्म action, लोकाधिपतिः lord of the world, भगवान् स्वयंभूरपि selfborn lord (Brahma) too, कः who, कुर्वीत may do, नु indeed, तत् that.
3::51::33::वीर्यवान् brave,जटायुः Jatayu, एवम् in that manner, शुभम् auspicious (cautious), वाक्यम् words, उक्त्वा having  said, रक्षसः of that demon, तस्य रावणस्य पृष्ठे at Ravana's back, भृशम् repeatedly, निपपात dashed.
3::51::34::(ततः thereafter), तं गृहीत्वा seizing him, अधिरूढः ascended, गजारोहः riding on an elephant, दुष्टवारणम् unruly elephant, यथा so also, स्यात् he, तीक्ष्णैः sharp, नखैः claws, समन्ततः all over, विददार pierced.
3::51::35::अस्य his, पृष्ठे back, तुण्डम् beak, समर्पयन् pressing, नखैः claws, विददार pierced, नखपक्षमुखायुधः a warrior with claws, wings and beak as the only weapons, केशांश्च hair too, उत्पाटयामास pulled out.
3::51::36::गृध्रराजेन by the king of vultures, मुहुर्मुहुः again and again, तथा in that manner, क्लिश्यमानः being tormented, सः रावणः he, Ravana, अमर्षफुरितोष्ठः सन् with his lips quivering with anger, प्राकम्पत was shaken.
3::51::37::रावणः Ravana, क्रोधमूर्छितः losing senses with rage, वामेन अङ्केन left arm, वैदेहीम् Vaidehi, परिष्वज्य holding firmly, आशु quickly, जटायुम् to Jatayu, तलेन palm, अभिजघान hit him.
3::51::38::तदा then, खगाधिपः lord of the birds, अरिन्दमः  subduer of enemies, जटायुः Jatayu, तम् him, अभिक्रम्य  occupied, तुण्डेन by his beak, अस्य Ravana's, दश ten, वामबाहून् left arms, व्यपाहरत् cut off.
3::51::39::सञ्छिन्नबाहोः whose arms were cut off, बाहवः arms, सद्यैव instantly from them, वल्मीकात् from an anthill, विषज्वालाः poisonous flames, वलीयुक्ताः emitting, पन्नगाः इव like serpants, सहसा all of a sudden, अभवन् came out. 
3::51::40::ततः then, दशग्रीवः tenheaded, रावणः Ravana, सीताम् Sita, उत्सृज्य left, मुष्टिभ्याम् with his fists, चरणाभ्यां च and feet, गृध्रराजम् Jatayu, क्रोधात् with anger, अपोथयत् attacked.
3::51::41::ततः then, अतुलवीर्ययो: of unequal valour, राक्षसानां मुख्यस्य of the chief of the demons, पक्षिणां प्रवरस्य king of the birds, मुहूर्तम् for a moment, सङ्ग्रामः fight, बभूव took place.
3::51::42::सः that, रावणः Ravana, खडगम् sword, उद्यम्य after lifting, रामस्य Rama's, अर्थे for the sake of, व्यायच्छमानस्य of one who was fighting relentlessly, तस्य his, पक्षौ two wings, पार्श्वौ च  both sides, पादौ च feet, अच्छिनत् cut off.
3::51::43::रौद्रकर्मणा one who performs terrible deeds, रक्षसा by the demon, छिन्नपक्षः clipped wings, सः that, गृध्रः vulture, हतः hurt, अल्पजीवितः with very little life left, धरण्याम् on the ground, सहसा immediately, निपपात fell.
3::51::44::वैदेही Sita, princess of Videha, भूमौ on the ground, पतितम् fallen down, क्षतजार्द्रम् drenched in blood , तं जटायुषम् that Jatayu, दृष्ट्वा  seeing, दुःखिता grieved, स्वबन्धुमिव as if he was her relative, अभ्यधावत ran towards him.
3::51::45::लङ्काधिपतिः lord of Lanka, नीलजीमूतनिकाशकायम् of colour like the dark bluish cloud, सुपाण्डुरोरस्कम् of fair chest, उदारवीर्यम् bold, शान्तम् made calm, अग्निदावमिव like the forest fire, तं जटायुषम् that Jatayu, पृथिव्याम् on the ground, ददर्श saw.
3::51::46::ततः then, शशिप्रभानना with her face like the radiant moon, जनकात्मजा Janaka's daughter, सीता Sita, तां him, रावणवेगमर्थितम् crushed by Ravana's onslaught, महीतले on the ground, निपातितम् fallen, तं पत्ररथम् that bird who rides on wings, पुनः again, परिष्वज्य took hold of him, रुरोद wept.
