3::16::1::While the great self Rama  lived happily there, autumn passed and dear winter set in.
3::16::2::Once Rama, delight of the Raghu race, went to the beautiful river Godavari for ablution in the early hours of the morning.
3::16::3::While valiant Lakshmana, walking behind Sita who was carrying a pitcher in her hand bent down a little and told Rama thus:
3::16::4::O sweetspeaking brother, the season which is dear to you has arrived. It appears the auspicious year is going to be embellished with this season.
3::16::5::People feel frozen with fog, and water is no more enjoyable. The earth is full of crops and fire is so agreeable.
3::16::6::Pious men offer their libations of the first crop at Agnistoma sacrifice and thereby please their manes and get rid of their sins. 
3::16::7::People in the countryside with their desires satisfied obtain abundant cow's milk at this time. Rulers of the earth are out on their expedition with a desire for victory.
3::16::8::As the Sun has resorted to the direction (south) that serves the god of death, the north devoid of (the Sun) shines like a woman without the vermilion mark on the forehead.
3::16::9::Presently with the Sun far away, the Himalayas abounding in snow has naturally justified its name.
3::16::10::The days are enjoyable at noon as it is pleasant to move about during this time since the sun is not scorching. But the shade and water seem to be unfortunate (as they are not liked by any one.
3::16::11::The days will be frostsmitten. The Sun will also be mild. Due to heavy dewfall the weather will be cold with the blowing of the wind. Forests will be empty (as no animals would be seen moving around.)
3::16::12::At this time people do not sleep under the open sky. With the month of Pushya approaching, nights feel cool and look red due to frost. They prolong into three yamas. 
3::16::13::With the radiance of the Sun dimmed, with its orb reddened by frost, the moon does not shine clear like a mirror blurred with breath.
3::16::14::On a fullmoon night the beams of the moon faded by forest look pale, dull like Sita scorched by the heat of the Sun.
3::16::15::The west wind which by nature feels cold at this time blows doubly cold, hit by snow.
3::16::16::The snowcold forest terrains are fertile with barley and wheat crops. As the Sun rises the swans and kraunchas produce pleasing notes.
3::16::17::The tops of rice crops shining like gold resemble the flowers of datepalm.The fields full of ripe paddy bending a little (under the weight of grains) look delightful.
3::16::18::The Sun risen at the distant horizon looks like the Moon, his lengthening rays covered with snow and dew.
3::16::19::The heat of the Sun which we do not feel in the forenoon is comfortable during midday when the Sun shines slightly reddish white on earth.
3::16::20::As the miadows are wet with dewdrops, the land looks delightful with mild Sunlight  shining on the surface.
3::16::21:: The wild tusker, extremely thirsty, touches the clean, cold water joyfully, but immediately withdraws its trunk unable to bear the cold.
3::16::22::Just as inefficient warriors do not enter the warfield, aquatic birds sitting near water do not venture to take a plunge into it.
3::16::23:: The flowerless forest ranges appear as if they are asleep, enveloped in the darkness of frost and  snow .
3::16::24::Now the rivers are not visible as the waters are covered with vapour. They are only inferred through the cackling of swans and the sands of the bank moistened with dewdrops.
3::16::25:: Due to snowfall, mildness of the Sun, and coldness (of weather) even the water flowing from the mountain top is not generally tasty.
3::16::26::The lotuses in the tank  no more shine (bright) as they are decayed by age, their filaments and pericarps withered with only stalks remaining.
3::16::27::At this time, righteous Bharata, the best among men, with his devotion to you must be sadly performing penance at his residence.
3::16::28::Giving up his kingdom, honour and pleasures of many kinds, Bharata will be living like an ascetic, sleeping on the ground in cold weather, his food under restriction.
3::16::29::At this time, Bharata,  accompanied by his subjects, must be daily going to river Sarayu for ablution.
3::16::30::How can Bharata who was brought up in luxury, who is delicate, and deserves all comfort, take a dip in river Sarayu (in cold morning) ?
3::16::31::He has a blue complexion, a pair of eyes like lotus petals, a thin waist and long arms. He is selfrestrained, softspoken, sweettempered and truthful. He knows his duty and maintains a low profile. A subduer  of enemies, he is heroic and great. Such Bharata has given up the diverse pleasures of life and has surrendered himself to you with all his soul.
3::16::32::Although you dwell in the forest, your great brother Bharata has won the kingdom of heaven by faithfully adopting your asceticism.
3::16::33::The saying that men follow mother's path but not the path of the father, has been disproved by Bharata.
3::16::34::How could mother Kaikeyi, who has a husband like Dasaratha and a noble son like Bharata, be so wicked by nature ?
3::16::35::When pious Lakshmana said thus to Rama out of his love for him, Rama replied, unable to tolerate the words of censure against mother (Kaikeyi) :
3::16::36::O dear, Kaikeyi, our second mother, is never to be criticised like that. You may, however, speak more of Bharata, the lord of the Iksvakus.
3::16::37::Even though I have made up my mind to dwell in the forest and keep my vow, my love for Bharata makes me waver like a child (Rama does not want Bharata to suffer on his account).
3::16::38::I remember his dear, sweet, ambrosial  words, soothing to the heart and pleasing to the mind.
3::16::39::O enhancer of joy of the Raghus  when shall I meet great Bharata, brave Satrughna and you all together?
3::16::40::Expressing his grief in such manner, Rama reached Godavari where he took his bath with his brother and Sita.
3::16::41::And then poised, they offered libations of water to their forefathers and gods and prayer to the rising Sun.
3::16::42::Accompanied by Sita and Lakshmana,Rama finished his bath in the river.He looked splendid like Lord Rudra followed by Nandi and the daughter of the king of  the mountains (Parvati). इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे षोडशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixteenth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
