3::50::1::While reposing, Jatayu heard the cry and at once looked up and saw Ravana and Vaidehi.
3::50::2::Glorious Jatayu, the best among the birds, looked like the peak of a mountain.His beak was sharp. His words were auspious. He spoke from the top of the tree:
3::50::3:: O tenheaded Ravana, I am Jatayu, king of vultures. I am mighty. An eternal follower, of dharma, I am an adherent to truth.
3::50::4::Rama, Dasaratha's son, is the king of the entire world. He is equal to Indra and Varuna. He is ever engaged in the welfare of the entire world.
3::50::5::The lady you want to abduct from here is the famous Sita, the lawful wife of Rama, the lord of the world.
3::50::6::How can a king who adheres to righteousness outrage another's wife ? O powerful one, a king's wife in particular should be protected.
3::50::7::Refrain yourself from the vile thought of violating other's wives. Wise men do not adopt what is censured by others. Just like one's own, the wise should protect other's wives.
3::50::8::O son of Paulastya learned men determine the path of dharma artha and kama,  following a king's conduct even if  they are not declared in sastras.
3::50::9::A king is the best repository of rigteousness, material wealth and pleasures. The king is the root of dharma, virtue and sin.
3::50::10::O best of demons  by nature you are sinful, and fickleminded. You do all forbidden acts. Otherwise,how could you get this wealth, like the celestial chariot?
3::50::11::Indeed, it is not possible to erase the nature of any one, whatever it be. Prosperity does not rest for long in the house of the evilminded.
3::50::12:: Powerful and righteous Rama has not offended you, your kingdom or your city. Why do you offend him?
3::50::13::On account of Surpanakha, Khara trespassed into Janasthana and got killed by Rama, without much effort. Tell me truly, what transgression (of dharma) did he commit for which you are stealing away the wife of Rama who is the lord of this world?.
3::50::14::Leave Vaidehi at once lest with her fierce looks you should be burnt down like demon Vrtra by the thunderbolt of Indra.
3::50::15::You are not aware that you are tying a venomous snake with the skirt of your cloth. worn by you. You are not able to see the noose of death tightened around your neck.
3::50::16::O gentle Ravana one should carry that much of weight which does not tire him. One should eat only that wholesome food which can be easily digested. 
3::50::17:: Who will do such a deed which cannot beget dharma, fame or glory in the world? Who will do such deeds that bring only exhaustion to the body? 
3::50::18::Sixty thousand years ago I was born, O Ravana  Since then I have ruled justly my hereditary kingdom.
3::50::19::I am old, you are young, wielding a bow and arrows, with shield to protect and chariot to ride. Even then I will not let you go safe with Vaidehi kidnapped.
3::50::20::You cannot carry Vaidehi by force within my very sight just as the everlasting revelations of the Vedas cannot be robbed by mere logic of reason.
3::50::21::O Ravana, if you are brave, fight with me. In a moment, you will be killed like Khara and lie down on the ground.
3::50::22::Clad in bark garments, Rama, who has often slain demons in the past will soon kill you in war.
3::50::23:: What can I do? O mean fellow the two princes have gone far away.You will soon be destroyed out of fear for them. There is no doubt.
3::50::24::I will not let you take away the auspicious, lotuseyed Sita, the dear consort of Rama as long as I am alive.
3::50::25::I should do this important work of those great souls, Rama and Dasaratha, even if it claims my life.
3::50::26::O ten headed Ravana stay, stay for a while. O demon  as long as I am alive I will treat you with the hospitality of war. You will be pulled down from this best of the chariots like a ripe fruit drops from the stalk.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे पञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftieth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
