3::9::1::While Rama was leaving with the permission of Sutikshna, Sita spoke these warm, affectionate words to her husband:
3::9::2::This great path of dharma you are following now can be attained only through subtle means by one free from addiction born of passion.
3::9::3::There are three kinds of vices born out of lust. First, speaking untruth, second, having sexual relation with others' wives and third, resorting to violence with no enmity. The later two vices are of serious nature.
3::9::4::O Rama you never spoke untruth in the past nor will you speak in future. How can there be any desire in you to destroy the virtue of others' wives ?
3::9::5::O Rama, lord among men, you hadn't it (lust for other women) in the past. You havn't it now. Never does it exist even in your mind.
3::9::6:: O prince, you are always faithful to your wife. You are righteous, truthful and obedient to your father's orders.
3::9::7::O Rama, you are truthful, honourable, powerful. O elder brother of Lakshmana, in you is established truth and righteousness.
3::9::8::O longarmed one, to contain all this is only possible for those who have conquered the senses. O handsome one, I know your ability to control the senses.
3::9::9::(But) you are a victim to the third (vice born of lust) i.e. showing violence without cause for enmity
3::9::10::O valiant one, you have promised to kill the demons in the battle, in order to protect the sages residing in the Dandaka forest.
3::9::11::It is only on account of this that you entered the wellknown Dandaka forest with your brother wielding bow and arrows.
3::9::12::I am, therefore, worried in my mind when I see you here and think of your wellbeing. I wish your ultimate good. [The next two lines appear, more or less, a repetition. So omitted : Editor]
3::9::13::O brave Rama, I do not like your going to Dandaka forest. I shall tell you the reason. Do listen.
3::9::14::Of course, you will go to the forest with your brother, holding the bow and arrows. Release the arrows when you see the forestrangers.
3::9::15::A bow in the hand of a kshatriya is like fuel to fire. It surely swells his strength and his brilliance.
3::9::16::O mightyarmed one, there dwelt in the past an ascetic, noble and truthful in a sacred forest where animals and birds lived merrily together.
3::9::17::Once Indra, husband of Sachi, came to his hermitage in the guise of an attendant, sword in hand, in order to hinder his penance.
3::9::18::Then while the sage was practising penance at the hermitage, he gave him that excellent sword to be kept in trust.
3::9::19::Having received the weapon as a trust, the sage went wandering in the forest, always attentive in safeguarding the weapon.
3::9::20::Vigilant about protecting the sword deposited with him, the sage never moved without it even when he went gathering roots and fruits.
3::9::21::While the sage moved about holding the weapon, he gave up the practice of penance gradually and developed a violent mindset.
3::9::22::By association with the sword, he developed a violent attitude. And in that habitual state of excitement he was dragged into unrighteous ways which (ultimately) took him to hell.
3::9::23::Contact with the weapon has led to this in the past. Like contact with fire, it leads man to destruction. I say this out of my love and reverence for you as a reminder and not as an instruction.
3::9::24::While holding a bow, you should not have the intention to kill demons residing in Dandaka with no animosity against you. O valiant one  I do not desire that any one should be killed without incurring any offence.
3::9::25::It is the duty of a kshatriya, a warrior to protect with his bow those who practise selfcontrol (penance) in the forest in a state of panic.
3::9::26:: Where is the question of wielding a weapon and living in the forest, where is the life of a kshatriya and the life of penance? For us, this is an encroachment. Let the law of the land be honoured.
3::9::27::Lord, when we handle the weapon, the mind gets vitiated. (Only) after returning to Ayodhya can you perform the duty of a kshatriya.
3::9::28::You would have been on unlimited source of joy to my fatherinlaw and motherinlaw had you permanently renounced the kingdom for the life of an ascetic.
3::9::29::Righteousness brings wealth. Wealth brings happiness. Righteousness brings everything. In fact, the essence of the world is righteousness.
3::9::30::The wise earn dharma through getting their bodies emaciated by carefully adopting different means of discipline (selftorture). Happiness does not beget happiness.
3::9::31::O gentle one you may move in this forest of ascetics with a pure mind. The true meaning behind everything in these three worlds is known to you, indeed.
3::9::32::I told you all this out of feminine fickleness. Who can guide you in the ways of dharma? After carefully deliberating the matter with your brother you may act according to your wish. Let there be no delay (hesitation).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे नवमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the ninth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
