3::49::1::On hearing the Sita's words, the powerful Ravana struck his palms one over the other and assumed a huge form (original figure).
3::49::2::Ravana again said to that princess from Mithila, I suppose you are too insane to disregard my strength and valour.
3::49::3::Standing in the sky, I can  lift the earth with my arms.  I can drink the oceans. I can kill even the god of death in a combat.
3::49::4::I can obstruct the Sun and shatter the earth with my sharp arrows. O mad woman I am a husband who can fulfil your desires, and can assume any form at my own free will. Look at me.
3::49::5::As Ravana exploded in anger, his ambercoloured eyes turned red like the radiance of the flaming fire, and almost as bright as the Sun.
3::49::6::Ravana, brother of Kubera, shed the gentle figure of a mendicant and assumed the form of the god of death.
3::49::7::Overcome by intense anger, Ravana's eyes reddened. The nightranger, stood armed with bow and arrows and shining with glittering gold ornaments, appeared like a black cloud.
3::49::8::Ravana, chief of the demons, shed the mendicant's form and assumed his real self. Clad in red garments, his eyes turned red in anger. Looking like layers of clouds, he stood in front of Sita, a gem among women.
3::49::9::Ravana said to the princess from Mithila, whose black hair was shining, who was luminous like the Sun and was clad in the best of cothes and ornaments. 
3::49::10::O beautiful lady  if you desire a husband who is famous in the three worlds, take refuge in me. I am fit to be your husband.
3::49::11::I am your praiseworthy husband. I will not cause any unpleasantness to you at any time. Abandon on your inclination towards, a (mere) mortal. Divert your love to me.
3::49::12::O stupid woman you think you are very wise. What is there in Rama so that you are attached to him ? He has left the kingdom and his kith and kin due to the words of a woman. He has not accomplished anything (in life). He has a limited life span and now lives in this forest haunted by wild animals.
3::49::13::Just as Budha (planet Mercury) catches Rohini (a cluster of five stars) in the sky, the evilminded, infatuated Ravana advanced towards the pitiable, pleasing Sita and caught hold of her.
3::49::14::Ravana seized with his left hand the lotuseyed Sita by the hair and lifted her by the thighs with his right hand.
3::49::15::The sylvan deities fled out of fear on seeing the dreadful appearance of Ravana who had sharp teeth and mighty arms. He looked like a mountain, a veritable god of death.
3::49::16::There arrived the great  golden chariot of Ravana, illusive and wonderful, harnessed with donkeys and braying like donkeys.
3::49::17::Reproaching the princess from Videha loudly and harshly, Ravana took her on his lap and put her on the chariot.
3::49::18::Seized by Ravana, illustrious Sita screamed aloud Alas, Rama. for one who was far away in the forest.
3::49::19::Passionate Ravana took hold of Sita who was not willing and was writhing in pain. He seized her  like (an eagle carrying away) a serpent queen and flew up.
3::49::20::While Sita was being carried off in the sky by the king of demons,   she screamed a lot in agony and anxiety like a mad woman in a bewildered state:
3::49::21::Alas, O longarmed Lakshmana, you who used to entertain your brother do not know that I am being carried away by this ruthless demon.
3::49::22::O Rama, you have given up your life, pleasure and treasure for the sake of righteousness. Do you not see me carried off by an unrighteous fellow ?
3::49::23:: O scorcher of enemies you are the chastiser of the haughty. Why do you not punish such a sinner like Ravana.
3::49::24::The effect of arrogant action cannot be seen right away. Just as the crop yields results only after ripening, in the same way it takes time. Time acts as a supporting factor.
3::49::25::Time has taken a toll of your senses. This has made you do what you have done. A great calamity is awaiting you in the hands of Rama. It will end your life.
3::49::26::Alas, the lawful wife of the glorious and righteous Rama is being abducted now. Let Kaikeyi along with her relations be happy with her desire fulfilled.
3::49::27::O karnikar trees in full bloom in Janasthana, tell Rama quickly that Ravana is kidnapping Sita.
3::49::28::I salute to Malyavan and  Prasravana mountains. Tell Rama at once that Ravana is carrying away Sita.
3::49::29::O river Godavari abounding in swans and cranes, my salutations to you  Tell Rama immediately that Ravana is taking away Sita.
3::49::30::I offer my salutations to different deities residing in this forest abounding in trees of many kinds. Tell my husband about me that I am being whisked away.
3::49::31::I seek refuge in all those living beings as well as herds of animals and birds in the forest.
3::49::32::Tell Rama that his dear wife Sita whom he loves more than his life is abducted helplessly.
3::49::33::If he knows that I am abducted by Yama, the god of death, that mighty, longarmed hero will save me even from there by virtue of his valour.
3::49::34::When the griefstricken, largeeyed Sita was lamenting piteously, she saw the vulture (Jatayu) seated on a tree.
3::49::35:: The heavyhipped Sita felt frightened in the grip of Ravana. When she saw Jatayu she screamed, shaken by sorrow:
3::49::36::O Jatayu, see me now being carried away by the sinful king of demons in this pitiable condition as though I am an orphan.
3::49::37::This nightranger is equipped with weapons. Cruel, strong and evilminded, he has won wars. You cannot stop him.
3::49::38::O Jatayu narrate to Rama and Lakshmana the exact facts of my abduction and all the details without any omission.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे एकोनपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyninth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
