3::13::1:: O Rama ,I am pleased. I wish you well. I am glad that both of you have come here with Sita to pay respect to me.
3::13::2:: Both of you are tired due to the journey. It is evident that Sita, daughter of Janaka, is anxious (to rest).
3::13::3:: Even though delicate, Sita never feels discouraged by difficulties. She has come to the forest full of obstacles, since she is motivated by her love for her husband.
3::13::4::O Rama, help Sita enjoy herself in whatever manner she likes. By following you into the forest, she has accomplished the most difficult task৷৷
3::13::5:: O Rama, the delight of the Raghu dynasty from the beginning of the creation women, by nature,  keep the husband company when all goes well and give them up when hard times come.
3::13::6:: Women are fickle like lightning, sharp like weapons and fast like Garuda or the windgod.
3::13::7:: Your wife is free from such blemishes. She is praiseworthy and worthy of mention as an example just like the revered Arundhati.
3::13::8::O Rama, subduer of enemies the place where you reside along with Lakshmana and Vaidehi will look adorned, indeed.
3::13::9:: Thus addressed, Rama held his palms together and said politely to the sage shining like fire:
3::13::10:: I consider myself blessed and favoured by a great sage like you, bestower of boons as you have been pleased with me, my brother and my life.
3::13::11:: Direct me to a place with water and dense forest where we can build an ashram and live happily.
3::13::12:: On hearing the words of Rama, Agastya, the best among the sages, coolheaded and righteous, thought a while and uttered these words coolly :
3::13::13:: O dear two yojanas away is a place wellknown as Panchavati, a beautiful resort with many roots, fruits, plenty of water and many animals.
3::13::14:: Reaching there, you wikk build a hermitage with Lakshmana and enjoy your life given to the fulfilment of the pledge to the father.
3::13::15:: O Rama, scion of the Kakutsthas  much of the period of exile king Dasaratha had assigned has passed. You will fulfil your promise and live happily in the kingdom.
3::13::16:: O Rama, joy of the Raghu family with the eldest son like you, your father is blessed and liberated like king Yayati.
3::13::17:: O sinless one, I have kown all these facts about you by the power of penance and love for Dasaratha.
3::13::18:: I know your heart by virtue of my penance. I, therefore, ask you to proceed to Panchavati, after ensuring your stay here with me in this penancegrove for the time being.
3::13::19:: O Raghava, that forest tract is delightful and beautiful. It is not far away(from here). Maithili (Sita) will enjoy her stay there.
3::13::20::O longarmed Rama,that place has plenty of roots and fruits. It is a solitary, holy and beautiful place teeming with various kinds of birds. Sita will enjoy her stay in the vicinity of river Godavari.
3::13::21:: O Rama, while staying with your wife, you will look after the ascetics living there since you are capable of giving protection. 
3::13::22:: O valiant Rama look at the great forest of madhuka trees. Walk north to the forest till you see a great banyan tree.
3::13::23:: Then climb the elevated ground not very far from the mountain. There is the wellknown Panchavati with forests, ever in full bloom.
3::13::24:: Thus addressed by Agastya,  Rama with Lakshmana paid respects to the sage wedded to truth and took leave of him.
3::13::25:: Both of them worshipped the feet of sage Agastya, and proceeded to Panchavati with his permission.
3::13::26:: Both the princes, unafraid of battles, held their bows, tied the quivers and carefully proceeded towards Panchavati along the path suggested by the sage.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे त्रयोदशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirteenth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
