3::29::1::Effulgent Rama looked at Khara who stood with a mace in hand minus his chariot  and said to him first in a gentle voice and then harshly :
3::29::2::Although you command a huge army with many elephants, horses, chariots, etc.  you have done such cruel deeds that the entire world despises you.
3::29::3::One who  is wicked, does sinful deeds and causes distress to all beings, will not survive even if he is the lord of the three worlds.
3::29::4::O nightranger, one who does a horrific deed which is against the world will be killed like an evil serpent come near.
3::29::5::Whoever commits sinful deeds out of greed or passion and without realisation will be ruined at the end like a lizard that eats hailstone (and dies).
3::29::6::O demon  what benefit will you  get by killing the venerable ascetics, followers of righteous path residing in Dandaka forest?
3::29::7::Cruel people, who are despised by the world for their sinful deeds, will not  be prosperous for long just like trees with decayed roots.
3::29::8::Just as the trees bear flowers at the proper season, so also people will certainly reap the fruits of their terrible, sinful deeds at appropriate time. 
3::29::9::O nightranger  people will reap the result of their sinful actions in this world soon like one eating poisonous food.
3::29::10::O nightranger  I have come with the orders of the king to put an end to the lives of the perpetrators of dreadful, sinful and offensive deeds in this world.
3::29::11::Now when I unleash the golden  arrows, they will pierce through your body and come out like serpents emerging from the anthill.
3::29::12::Slain by me in the battle today, you and your army will follow the righteous men eaten by you in Dandaka forest. 
3::29::13::The great seers whom you have earlier tortured and killed will, from their aerial vehicles, see you fallen into hell.
3::29::14::O vile fellow, now you may strike at me as you please. I will make your head fall  down like a palm fruit.
3::29::15::Challenged by Rama  in that manner, Khara, his senses switched off, eyes turned red due to anger, replied laughing :
3::29::16::O son of Dasaratha, it is not praiseworthy to kill ordinary demons in war. Why do you praise yourself for it?
3::29::17::The valiant, strong and the best of men do not at all speak proudly of themselves  and their valour.
3::29::18::O Rama common people, having no control over themselves and the lowest of kshatriyas boast of themselves in the world in a meaningless way as you are doing (now).
3::29::19:: When death comes in a battle no hero will name his race and boast of himself unnessarily.
3::29::20::All your meanness is exhibited by your boasting just as the kusa grass caught by fire appears like gold.
3::29::21::Indeed, (it is strange that) you do not see me holding a mace and standing here like an unshakeable mountain which contains minerals and supports the earth.
3::29::22::Just like lord Yama, holding a noose of death is alone enough to destroy the three worlds, I am alone sufficient to take away your life in war, a mace in hand.
3::29::23::Indeed, I shall not speak any more even though a lot can be said on you. But the Sun is about to set and it will be improper to wage war thereafter.
3::29::24::You have killed these fourteen thousand demons. Therefore, I will wipe their tears by destroying you.
3::29::25::Having said this, highly enraged Khara adorned with large shoulder bands, hurled  at Rama, his mace glowing like a thunderbolt.
3::29::26::The huge, blazing mace hurled by Khara's arms reduced the trees and shrubs into ashes and came close to Rama.
3::29::27::The mace, which moved in the sky burning like the noose of death was shattered to pieces by Rama.
3::29::28::The mace shattered by the arrows of Rama , fell down scattered to pieces on the ground like a female serpent subdued by the force of mantras and medicine.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे एकोनत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyninth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
