3::16::1::महात्मनः great self, तस्य राघवस्य that Rama's, सुखम् comfort, वसतः while living, शरद्व्यपाये  autumn over, इष्टः favourite season, हेमन्तऋतुः winter season, प्रवर्तत set in.
3::16::2::कदाचित् once, सः रघुनन्दनः  he, the delight (beloved son) of Raghu race, शर्वर्याम्  when the night, प्रभातायाम् turned into morning, रम्याम् beautiful, गोदावरीं नदीम् Godavari river, अभिषेकार्थम् for ablution, प्रययौ went.
3::16::3::भ्राता brother, वीर्यवान् heroic, सौमित्रि: Saumitri, प्रह्वः bending a little, कलशहस्तः pitcher in hand, पृष्ठतः behind, सीतया सह with Sita, अनुव्रजन् walking behind, इदम् this, अब्रवीत् said.
3::16::4::प्रियंवद sweetspeaking, यः this( season), ते to you, प्रियः dear, सः अयं कालः this time, सम्प्राप्तः has set in, येन by which, शुभः auspicious, संवत्सरः year, अलङ्कृतः इव as if decorated, आभाति appears.
3::16::5::लोकः people , नीहारपरुषः frozen with fog, पृथिवी the earth, सस्यशालिनी full of crops, जलानि waters, अनुपभोग्यानि no more enjoyable, हव्यवाहनः the fire, सुभगः very enjoyable.
3::16::6::सन्तः pious men, नवाग्रयणपूजाभिः with offering of libations of the first crop at Agnistoma sacrifices, पितृदेवताः manes अभ्यर्च्य after worshipping, काले at the proper time, कृताग्रयणकाः  the sages who have conducted sacrifice with oblation, विगतकल्मषाः rid of their sins.
3::16::7::सम्पन्नतरगोरसाः obtaining abundant cow's milk, जनपदाः people of the countryside, प्राज्यकामाः with fulfilled desire, महीपालाः rulers of the earth, विजिगीषव: desirous of victory, यात्रास्थाः going on expedition, विचरन्ति are moving about.
3::16::8::सूर्ये Sun, अन्तकसेविताम् serving the god of death, दिशम् direction, दृढम् stand still, सेवमाने attending, उत्तरा दिक् northern side, विहीनतिलका without the vermilion mark, स्त्रीव like a woman, प्रकाशते is shining.
3::16::9::प्रकृत्या by nature, हिमकोशाढ्यः with snow settled heavily, साम्प्रतम् presently दूरसूर्यश्च distant Sun, हिमवान् Himalaya, गिरिः mountain, हिमवान् snowy mountain, सुव्यक्तम् clearly, यथार्थनामा has a befitting name.
3::16::10::मध्याह्ने at noon, स्पर्शतः the touch, सुखाः comfortable, अत्यन्तसुखसञ्चाराः  comfortable to go about, दिवसाः daytime, सुभगादित्याः will be enjoyable, छायासलिलदुर्भगाः in shade the water will be enjoyable৷৷
3::16::11::साम्प्रतम् at this time, हिमध्वस्ताः destroyed by frost, दिवसाः days, मृदुसूर्याः mild Sun, सनीहाराः heavy dews, पटुशीताः severe cold, समारुताः with breeze blowing, शून्यारण्याः with none moving in the forest, भान्ति shine.
3::16::12::साम्प्रतम् at this time, निवृत्ताकाशशयनाः  sleep under the open sky, हिमारुणाः reddened due to frost, शीताः cool, वृद्धतरायामाः  nights are long, पुष्यनीताः (the month of) Pushya   approaching, त्रियामाः night consisting of three yamas (yama  3 hours approximately), यान्ति  run into
3::16::13::रविसङ्क्रान्तसौभाग्यः with the radiance of the Sun dimmed, तुषारारुणमण्डलः with the orb reddened owing to frost, चन्द्रमाः Moon, निःश्वासान्धः with its surface looking blurred with breath, आदर्श इव like a mirror, न प्रकाशते does not shine.
3::16::14::पौर्णमास्याम् on a fullmoon night, तुषारमलिना faded by frost, ज्योत्स्ना moonlight, न राजते not shining, आतपश्यामा scorched by heat, सीतेव like Sita, लक्ष्यते appearing, न तु शोभते not bright.
3::16::15::प्रकृत्या by nature, शीतलस्पर्शः cold touch, साम्प्रतम् at this time, हिमविद्धश्च hit by snow, पश्चिमः वायुः the west wind, काले at this time, द्विगुणशीतलः doubly cold, वाति blowing.
3::16::16::बाष्पच्छन्नानि covered by dew drops, यवगोधूमवन्ति च have abundant barley and wheat crops, अरण्यानि forests, सूर्ये Sun, अभ्युदिते rises, नद्भि:  produce notes, क्रौञ्चसारसैः by kraunchas and swans, शोभन्ते are delightful.
3::16::17::कनकप्रभाः shining like gold, शालयः rice fields, खर्जूरपुष्पाकृतिभिः resembling the shape of date flowers, पूर्णतण्डुलैः full of ripened rice grain, शिरोभिः with heads of paddy stocks,किञ्चित् slightly, आनम्रा bent down, शोभन्ते look delightful,
3::16::18::हिमनीहारसंवृतैः covered with snow and dew, उपसर्पद्भि: lengthening,  मयूखैः by rays, सूर्यः Sun, दूरम् yonder, अभ्युदितः risen up, शशाङ्कः Moon, इव like, लक्ष्यते appears.
3::16::19::पूर्वाह्णे in the forenoon, अग्राह्यवीर्यः when his(Sun's) heat cannot be felt, मध्याह्ने at midday, स्पर्शतः by touch, सुखः comfortable, संरक्तः red, किंचित् a little, आपाण्डुः whitish, आतपः heat, क्षितौ on earth, शोभते is delightful.
3::16::20::अवश्यायनिपातेन with dewdrops fallen, किञ्चित् a little, प्रक्लिन्नशाद्वला the grassland wet with frost, निविष्टतरुणातपा with mild heat  on the surface, वनानाम् the forests, भूमिः land, शोभते looks delightful.
3::16::21::अत्यन्ततृषितः extremely thirsty, वन्यः wild , द्विरदः tusker, विमलम् pure water, शीतम् cool, उदकम् water, सुखम् joyfully, स्पृशन् for touch, करम् trunk of elephant, प्रतिसंहरते takes back.
3::16::22::समुपासीनाः seated nearby, एते these, जलचारिणः aquatic, विहगाः birds, अप्रगल्भाः inefficient ones, आहवम् इव as to the battlefield, सलिलम् water, नावगाहन्ति not plunging into.
3::16::23::अवश्यायतमोनद्धाः enveloped by the darkness of frost ( at dawn), नीहारतमसा with the darkness of snow, आवृताः covered, विपुष्पाः without flowers, वनराजयः the forest ranges, प्रसुप्ताः इव as if sleeping, लक्ष्यन्ते appear.
3::16::24::साम्प्रतम्  now, बाष्पसञ्छन्नसलिलाः waters covered with vapour, रुतविज्ञेयसारसाः inferred from the cackling of swans, सरितः river, हिमार्द्रवालुकैः with sands drenched with snow, तीरैः river banks,भान्ति appear.
3::16::25::तुषारपतनाच्चैव  due to snowfall, भास्करस्य Sun's, मृदुत्वात् owing to mildness, शैत्यात् caused by coldness, रसवत् tasty, जलम् water, अगाग्रस्थमपि  although flowing from top of the mountain, प्रायेण generally.
3::16::26::कमलाकराः lotustanks, जराजर्जरितैः grey with age, शीर्णकेसरकर्णिकैः with filament and pericarp withered, नालशेषैः only stalks remaining, हिमध्वस्तैः destroyed by snow, पद्मैः by lotuses, न भान्ति are not shining.
3::16::27::अस्मिन् काले at such a time, पुरुषव्याघ्रः tiger among men, धर्मात्मा righteous self, भरतः Bharata, दुःखसमन्वितः sadly, त्वद्भक्त्या for his devotion to you, पुरे at his residence, तपः penance, चरति is performing.
3::16::28::राज्यं च the kingdom, मानम् honour, विविधान् various, बहून् many, भोगांश्च pleasures, त्यक्त्वा after giving up, तपस्स्वी as an asectic, नियताहारः  controlling food, शीते in cold, महीतले on the ground, शेते  will be sleeping.
3::16::29::सोऽपि Bharata also, इमां वेलाम् at this time, अभिषेकार्थम् for ablution, उद्यतः intending to, प्रकृतिभिः by his subjects, वृतः surrounded by, नित्यम् daily, सरयूं नदीम् in river Sarayu, प्रयाति goes forth, नूनम् surely.
3::16::30::अत्यन्तसुखसंवृद्धः brought up in comfort, सुकुमारः delicate, सुखोचितः  deserving comfort, अपररात्रेषु in the later part of the night, कथं नु how can, सरयूम् to Sarayu, अवगाहते for a dip.
3::16::31::पद्मपत्रेक्षणः  with eyes like lotus petals, वीरः valiant, श्यामः  of blue complexion, निरुदरः of thin waist, महान् great, धर्मज्ञः knower of his duty, सत्यवादी च  truthful, ह्रीनिषेधः one who maintains a low profile,  जितेन्द्रियः self controlled, प्रियाभिभाषी  softspoken, मधुरः sweet in temperament, दीर्घबाहुः  longarmed, अरिन्दमः a subduer of enemies, विविधान् diverse, भोगान् pleasures, सन्त्यज्य  giving up, सर्वात्मना with all his efforts, आर्यम् your, श्रितः devoted to.
3::16::32::यः who, वनस्थमपि dwelling in the forest, त्वाम् yourself, तापस्ये in adopting asceticism, अनुविधीयते faithfully follows, तव भ्रात्रा your brother, महात्मना great self, भरतेन by Bharata, स्वर्गः heaven, जितः won.
3::16::33::द्विपदाः humans, पित्र्यम् father's, न अनुवर्तन्ते do not follow, मातृकम् mother's, इति this way, ख्यातः wellknown, अयम् this, लोकप्रवादः saying in the world, भरतेन by Bharata, अन्यथा otherwise, कृतः is rendered.
3::16::34::यस्याः whose, दशरथः Dasaratha, भर्ता husband, साधुः noble, भरतः Bharata, सुतः son, सा she, अम्बा mother, कैकेयी Kaikeyi, तादृशी such a lady, क्रूरशीलिनी a woman of wicked nature, कथं नु how did it happen?
3::16::35::धार्मिके generous, लक्ष्मणे Lakshmana, स्नेहात् out of love, इत्येवम् in this way, वाक्यम् words, ब्रुवते as he was uttering, राघवः Rama, जनन्याः mother's, तम् him, परिवादम् censure, असहन् unable to tolerate, अब्रवीत् said.
3::16::36::तात dear, मध्यमा middle, अम्बा mother, कथञ्चन never, ते by you, न गर्हितव्या not to be criticised, इक्ष्वाकुनाथस्य of the lord of the Ikshvakus, भरतस्य Bharata's, तां कथामेव about him, कुरु you may.
3::16::37::मे my, बुद्धि: mind, निश्चितापि even though determined, वनवासे to dwell in the forest, दृढव्रता firmly to keep my vow, भरतस्नेहसन्तप्ता concern for his love of Bharata, पुनः again, बालिशीक्रियते waver like a child.
3::16::38::प्रियाणि dear, मधुराणि sweet, हृद्यानि soothing to the heart, अमृतकल्पानि ambrosial, मनःप्रह्लादनानि च that which pleases the mind, अस्य वाक्यानि his words, संस्मरामि I remember.
3::16::39::रघुनन्दन enhancer of joy of the Raghus, अहम् I am, महात्मना by the great self, भरतेन by Bharata, वीरेण by the brave, शत्रुघ्नेन च and Satrughna, त्वया च and by you, कदा नु indeed, समेष्यामि come together. 
3::16::40::काकुत्स्थ: Kakutstha, (Rama) तत्र there, स इत्येवम् he in that manner, विलपन् crying aloud, गोदावरीं नदीम् to river Godavari, प्राप्य having reached, सानुजः with his brother, सीतया सह and with Sita, अभिषेकम् bath, चक्रे took.
3::16::41::अथ and then, ते they, सलिलैः with water, पितृ़न् forefathers, दैवतानि च and gods, तर्पयित्वा offered oblations, उदितम् risen, सूर्यम् Sun, देवताश्च deities also, समाहिताः poised together, स्तुवन्ति स्म sang in praise.
3::16::42::सीताद्वितीयः accompanied by Sita, सः रामः that Rama, कृताभिषेकः completing his bath, सहलक्ष्मणेन along with Lakshmana, गिरिराजपुत्र्या with the daughter of the king of the mountains, कृताभिषेकः ablution over, सनन्दी along with Nandi, ईशः Isvara, रुद्रः इव like  Rudra, रराज shone.
