3::53::1::जनकात्मजा Janaka's daughter, मैथिली Maithili, खम् into the sky, उत्पतन्तम् while flying, तम् Ravana, दृष्ट्वा seeing, परमोद्विग्ना agitated greatly, महति intense, भये fear, वर्तिनी became, दुःखिता miserable.
3::53::2::ह्रियमाणा while being carried away, सीता Sita, करुणम् piteously, रुदन्ती weeping, रोषरोदनताम्राक्षी eyes reddened due to crying out of anger and grief, भीमाक्षम् with frightening  eyes, राक्षसाधिपम् to Ravana, the lord of demons, इदम् these (words), अब्रवीत् said.
3::53::3::नीच O mean, रावण Ravana, विरहिताम् when I am separated, माम् me, चोरयित्वा having  stolen, पलायसे  run away, इति यत् like this, अनेन by this, कर्मणा by action, न व्यपत्रपसे are you not ashamed?
3::53::4::दुष्टात्मन् O wicked fellow, हर्तुम् to abduct, इच्छता desiring, भीरुणा by a timid one, त्वयैव  yourself, मम my, भर्ता husband, मायया with deceit, मृगरूपेण in the form of deer, अपवाहितः led to a distance. 
3::53::5::यः who, गृध्रराजः king of vultures, माम् me, त्रातुम् to protect, उद्यतः tried, मम my, श्वशुरस्य of fatherinlaw, पुराणः old, सखा friend, अयम् he, असौ अपि he too, विनिपातितः is fallen.
3::53::6::राक्षसाधमः O lowly demon, ते विर्यम्  bravery, परमम् very great, दृश्यते खलु is seen indeed, नामधेयम् your name, विश्राव्य after announcing, त्वया by your, युद्धे war, जिता won, नास्मि हि I am not.
3::53::7::नीच O lowly fellow, रहिते when alone, परस्य च other's, स्त्रियाः woman's, हरणम् abduction, ईदृशम् this way, गर्हितम् despised, कर्म deed, कृत्वा after doing, कथम् how is it, न लज्जसे  are you not ashamed
3::53::8::शौण्डीर्यमानिनः considering yourself to be brave, तव yourself, सुनृशंसम् this very cruel act, अधर्मिष्ठम् unrighteous, कुत्सितम् despised by others, कर्म action, लोकेषु in the worlds, पुरुषाः people, कथयिष्यन्ति will talk about.
3::53::9::strength, धिक् fie, लोके in the world, कुलाक्रोशकरम् that which would bring calumny to the family, ते to you, ईदृशम् such, चारित्रम् behaviour, धिक् I condemn.
3::53::10::किम् what, कर्तुम् to do, शक्यम् is possible, यत् since, एवम् in this way, जवेनैव  so swiftly, धावसि you are running, मुहूर्तमपि for a moment also, तिष्ठस्व you stay, जीवन् with life, न प्रतियास्यसि you will not.
3::53::11::तयोः of both of them, पार्थिवपुत्रयोः of the two princes, चक्षुष्पथम् within the range of their sight, प्राप्य on reaching, त्वम् you, ससैन्योऽपि even with your army, मुहूर्तमपि for a moment, जीवितुम् to live, न समर्थः हि not possible.
3::53::12::वने in the forest, प्रज्वलितस्य of burning, अग्नेः fire, स्पर्शम् touch, विहङ्गमः इव like bird, त्वम् you, तयोः of both of them, शरस्पर्शम् touch of arrows, सोढुम् to endure, कथञ्चन anyhow, न शक्तः it is not possible for you.
3::53::13::रावण Ravana, साधु it is only proper, आत्मनः your, पथ्यम् good for your wellbeing, कुरु you may do, माम् me, साधु be good, मुञ्च you may release, त्वम् you, माम् me, न मुञ्चसि you do not leave, यदि what, मत्प्रधर्षणरुष्टः enraged for the assaulting me, मम पतिः my husband, भ्रात्रा सह along with his brother, विनाशाय for destruction, विधास्यति he will arrange.
3::53::14::नीच O mean fellow, त्वम् you, येन by which, व्यवसायेन  effort, माम् me, बलात् by force, हर्तुम् to abduct, इच्छसि desire, ते your, सः that, व्यवसायः determination, निरर्थकः fruitless, भविष्यति will become.
3::53::15::अहम् I am, विबुधोपमम् godlike, भर्तारम् husband, तम् him, अपश्यन्ती without seeing him, शत्रुवशगा at the mercy of an enemy, चिरम् long, प्राणान् life, धरयितुम् to hold on, न उत्सहे हि I am not enthused.
3::53::16::मर्त्य: a mortal, मृत्युकाले at the time of death, यथा as, विपरीतानि very differently, सेवते he will resort to, आत्मनः your own, पथ्यम् whatever is beneficial to you, श्रेयो वा your welfare, न समवेक्षसे you are not able to foresee.
3::53::17::मुमूर्षूणाम्  who want to die, सर्वेषाम्  all of them, यत् what, पथ्यम् is salutary, तत् that, न रोचते not like, अद्य now, त्वाम् you, कण्ठे in your neck, कालपाशावपाशितम् noose of death wound round, पश्यामि हि I see.
3::53::18::दशानन tenheaded Ravana, त्वम् you, अस्मिन् in this, भयस्थाने cause of fear, यथा even so, न बिभेषि you are not scared, हिरण्मयान् golden, महीरुहान् trees, सम्पश्यसि you see, व्यक्तम्  evident.
3::53::19::रावण Ravana, रुधिरौघनिवाहिनीम् river carrying torrents of blood flowing, घोराम् dreadful, वैतरणीं नदीम् river Vaitarani, भीमम् frightening, असिपत्रवनं चैव forest of trees with swords as leaves, पश्यसि see.
3::53::20::तप्ककाञ्चनपुष्पाम् with bright golden flowers, वैडूर्यप्रवरच्छदाम् with barks of excellent Vaidurya stones like bark, आयसैः with iron, कण्टकैः thorns, चिताम् logged, तीक्ष्णाम् sharp, शाल्मलीम् salmali (silkcotton) tree, द्रक्ष्यसे you see. 
3::53::21::निर्घृणः pitiless, त्वम् you, महात्मनः of the noble, तस्य his, ईदृशम् such, अलीकम् deceiving, कृत्वा after doing, विषम् poison, पीत्वेव as if after drinking, चिरम् for long, धरितुम् to survive, न शक्ष्यसि not possible.
3::53::22::रावण Ravana, त्वम् you, दुर्निवारेण by the inevitable, कालपाशेन noose of death, बद्धः bound, मम my, भर्तुः husband's, महात्मनः great Rama, क्व where can you, गतः go, शर्म peace, लप्स्यसे will you get.
3::53::23::येन by whom, महावने in this great forest, भ्रात्रा विना without the help of his brother, निमेषान्तरमात्रेण in a short while, चतुर्दश सहस्राणि fourteen thousand, राक्षसाः demons, निहताः were killed, वीरः warrior, सर्वास्त्रकुशली wellversed in the use of all kinds of weapons, बली strong man, सः that, राघवः Rama, इष्टभार्यापहारिणम्  who has stolen his beloved wife, त्वाम् you, तीक्ष्णैः with sharp, शरैः arrows, कथम् how, न हन्यात् will he not kill?
3::53::24::रावणाङ्कगा a lady under Ravana's grip, वैदेही Vaidehi (Sita), भयशोकसमाविष्टा full of fear and sorrow, एतत् च these words, अन्यच्च and other words, परुषम् harsh, करुणम् piteously,  विललाप ह wept.
3::53::25::तथा likewise, भृशार्ताम् greatly terrified, विलापपूर्वम् weeping, करुणं च piteously, बहुचैव in many ways, भाषिणीम्  talking, करुणम् mournfully, विचेष्टतीम् struggling, नृपात्मजाम् princess, आगतगात्रवेपथुम्  whose  body started shivering, भामिनीम् to the beautiful lady, पापः sinner Ravana, जहार carried off.
