3::7::1::Rama, the scorcher of enemies, along with his brother Lakshmana and Sita and the sages went to Sutikshna's hermitage.
3::7::2::After covering a long distance and crossing the river (Ganga) with plenty of water, Rama saw a huge mountain looking like a lofty cloud.
3::7::3::Rama and Lakshmana, the best of the Ikshvaku family, accompanied by Sita entered the dense forest  filled with trees all over.
3::7::4::Entering that dreadful forest, they saw trees full of flowers and fruits, and a hermitage in a lonely place with lines of bark robes hanging.
3::7::5::There at the hermitage was Sutikshna, an ascetic grown old with (long) penance, wearing soiled, matted locks and seated. Rama (first) addressed him as per custom.
3::7::6::O venerable one, I am Rama.You are a great sage, armed with truth as your prowess and a knower of dharma. I have come to see you. Could you speak to me?
3::7::7::Thereafter the composed Sutikshna, looked at Rama, the best among righteous men, and embracing him with both his arms said:
3::7::8::O Rama, the best among the Raghavas and among the upholders of truth, you are welcome. With your presence this hermitage will have a protector now.
3::7::9::O renowned hero, I had heard that you have come to Chitrakuta, renouncing your  kingdom. I have been waiting so long to see you here. Unable to give up this body, I did not even leave the earth for heaven, the world of the gods.
3::7::10::O scion of the Kakutstha family, Indra, king of the gods came to me and said that by my meritorious deeds I have won all the worlds.
3::7::11::Along with your wife and Lakshmana you may roam by my grace the worlds won by me and served by divine sages like devarsi Narada.
3::7::12::Selfpossessed Rama replied to the truthful ascetic who had performed intense penance. Just as Kasyapa would address Lord Brahma:
3::7::13::O great sage I will win all the worlds myself. I (only) want to live in this forest. Allow me. 
3::7::14::You are ever engaged in the welfare of all beings. I have heard this from the great sage Sarabhanga of Gautama's clan.
3::7::15::Thus addressed by  Rama, Sutikshna, the great sage, wellknown to the world was highly delighted. He (then) said these sweet words:
3::7::16::O Rama this is a salubrious hermitage where hosts of sages live and which is full of roots and fruits, you may enjoy yourself here.
3::7::17::O illustrious Rama, herds of animals visit this place fearlessly, enticing the inmates and (then) go back without harming any one.
3::7::18::When heroic Rama heard that there was no other problem from the wild animals except their frequent incursions, he lifted his bow with an arrow and said these words:
3::7::19::O reverend one, I will kill with a sharpedged arrow, glowing like a thunderbolt, all those herds of animals who keep coming here.
3::7::20::What can be more agonizing for you (than my killing animals). I (therefore) do not foresee our long stay in this hermitage.
3::7::21::Rama stopped with this. And then the evening drew to a close. Offering his evening oblation, he arranged for his stay along with Sita and Lakshmana in the delightful hermitage of Sutikshna.
3::7::22::Rama stopped with this. And then the evening drew to a close. Offering his evening oblation, he arranged for his stay along with Sita and Lakshmana in the delightful hermitage of Sutikshna.
3::7::23::Seeing that the evening had passed and night had set in, the great sage Sutikshna with due hospitality, served those best of men, food fit for ascetics.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे सप्तमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventh sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
