3::69::1::Rama and Lakshmana offered libations (for Jatayu) and went westward, looking for Sita in the forest.
3::69::2::Wielding bow, arrows and sword, both the princes of the Ikshvaku race went southward and entered an untrodden (densely wooded) tract.
3::69::3::It was a dense, impenetrable and dreadful forest covered with shrubs, trees and creepers spread all over.
3::69::4::The two mighty heroes swiftly forged through the great forest, which was an abode of serpents and lions.
3::69::5::Both the mighty princes of the Raghu dynasty covered a distance of three krosas from Janasthana and entered the impassable kraunchaforest. 
3::69::6::Tormented due to abduction of Sita, the two princes anxious to see her searched all over the dense forest stopping here and there on the way. The thick forest looked like a conglomeration of big clouds. It was filled with different kinds of birds, snakes and animals.
3::69::7::Then both the sons of Dasaratha, went further east, crossed the kraunchaforest after three krosas. They saw a dreadful forest which was full of fierce animals and birds near the hermitage of sage Matanga. It was densely covered with trees. They saw there a cave perpetually enveloped in darkness which was as deep as the netherworld.
3::69::8::Both the princes,the best among men, reached the cave and saw a huge demoness with a disfigured face not far from the cave.
3::69::9::Then the two brothers saw a fearful demoness who could strike terror in the mind of the timid, an uncouth figure with huge curved skins, with a big stomach, dishevelled hair, sharp and long teeth, devouring wild animals.
3::69::10::She came close to them, held Lakshmana who was walking ahead of his brother and said Come, let us enjoy.
3::69::11::Taking hold of Saumitri the demoness said 'I am Ayomukhi and I have been obtained by you. You got me, O hero, O lord  For the rest of your life you will sport with me on the lofty hills and river banks.'
3::69::12::Thus addressed, Lakshmana, subduer of enemies, became angry, took out the sword and cut off her ears, nose and breasts. 
3::69::13::When the ears and nose of the frightening demoness were cut off she shouted in a fierce tone and ran away in the direction she had come from.
3::69::14::The destroyers of enemies, Rama and Lakshmana of great valour went through the dense forest after she ran away.  
3::69::15::Lakshmana of great brilliance and power, of good conduct and pure character spoke to his highly effulgent brother with folded hands:
3::69::16::My arm is throbbing heavily. My mind is agitated. The omens I see foretell some undesirable events.
3::69::17::O noble brother be alert. Heed my words of good advice. The bad omens I see presage perils.
3::69::18::This vanchulaka bird's loud and dreadful screams suggest our triumph in war.
3::69::19::As both the brothers with great prowess were searching for Sita all over, a huge sound exploded as if shattering the forest.
3::69::20::It appeared as though a fierce wind rose from the forest and filled the sky.
3::69::21::While looking for the sound, Rama with his brother saw a demon with a huge body and a big belly.
3::69::22:: Then both the brothers saw a very tall figure with a trunk that stood facing them. He had neither neck nor head. His face was in the stomach.
3::69::23::With sharp bristled hair all over the body, he was a mammoth figure who looked like a mountain  resembling a dark cloud with his voice like the thunder. 
3::69::24::He had a single eye that was reddishbrown in colour resembling flaming fire. It was fixed in the chest. His eyelashes glowed. He had instant vision with massive fangs in his huge mouth. He was licking his lips.
3::69::25::The terrific demon kept eating bears, lions, deer and elephants, catching with both his arms stretching up to one yojana. 
3::69::26::He stood rooted there, catching bears, flocks of birds and deer with both his hands stretching up to one yojana, pulling and pushing them. (Now) he obstructed the path of the two brothers.
3::69::27::Then the brothers after covering one krosa (2 miles) saw a cruel, fierce, mighty monster named Kabandha looking like a trunk. He had a dreadful appearance and his arms encircled the area.
3::69::28::The longarmed demon spread his hands and caught hold of Rama and Lakshmana together by pressing them with all his force.
3::69::29::The two mighty brothers who wielded swords and strong bows and whose bodies were of fiery splendour became helpless, seized by the hands of Kabandha.
3::69::30::Of the two heroes, Rama being courageous was not worried but Lakshmana being younger and not having as much courage, was very much concerned and depressed. He said to Rama: 
3::69::31::O heroic Rama see how helpless I am under the control of the demon. Set yourself free, leaving me alone and using me as an offering.
3::69::32::Giving me to this monstor as an offering, you may run away happily. I think you will soon obtain Vaidehi.
3::69::33::O scion of the Kakutstha dynasty, on getting the hereditary kingdom and ruling over it you should always remember me.
3::69::34::O  valiant Lakshmana, a hero like you should not get desparate. said Rama to Saumitri when he was thus entreated by Lakshmana.
3::69::35::In the meanwhile the foremost of the demons, Kabandha, rumbling like thunder questioned the brothers, Rama and Lakshmana:
3::69::36::Who are you with bulllike shoulders, wielding big swords, bows and arrows? By coming to this place you have become my food.
3::69::37::For what purpose have you come? What work have you here ? You have come at the right time as my food, since I am hungry.
3::69::38::Holding bows, arrows and swords, looking like bulls with pointed horns you have entered my mouth. It is impossible for you to live any more.
3::69::39::On hearing the words of the evilminded Kabandha, Rama said to Lakshmana with dried up mouth:
3::69::40::O Lakshmana, your valour is truth.We have gone through from one calamity to a greater one without finding the beloved Sita. Now we have landed into a terrible crisis which will put an end to our own life.
3::69::41::O tiger among men see how powerful the might of time is for all beings Just see  yourself and myself afflicted wth this great calamity.
3::69::42::O Lakshmana look at the power of time over all creatures There is nothing too heavy for time. Even those who know the use of arms in war, or are brave or strong enough, cannot  withstand the force of time like the barriers built with sand.
3::69::43::Firm in the strength of truth, famous and powerful Rama, son of Dasaratha,  determined to act with a steadfast mind, spoke to Lakshmana of mighty manliness on seeing him. इत्यार्ष श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे एकोनसप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyninth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
