3::48::1::Addressed thus by Sita, Ravana, his anger roused, knitted his eyebrows with a frown on his forehead and replied to her harshly:
3::48::2:: O paragon of beauty  I am the halfbrother of Kubera, born of his stepmother. I am known as the tenheaded, powerful Ravana. Be blessed 
3::48::3::Just as people get scared of death, all (creatures) including gandharvas, gods, evil spirits, birds and snakes run away from me.
3::48::4::For some reason or other a duel took place between me and king Kubera. With my prowess, I defeated him in the duel. 
3::48::5:: Out of fear for me, Kubera is residing on the mighty mount Kailasa, leaving his own earlier prosperous place of residence.
3::48::6::O noble lady  with my valour I gained over from Kubera the aerial chariot 'Pushpaka', which can go wherever one desires and in which I move about in the sky.
3::48::7::O Princess from Mithila, seeing my angry face  even gods led by Indra take to their heels in fear.
3::48::8::Wherever I am, the Windgod blows with hesitation. So are the Sun and the Moon afraid of me. Afraid of me the Sun duly discharges his duties.
3::48::9::Wherever I stay or move about, the leaves of trees do not shake, and the waters in rivers remain still.
3::48::10::My city known as Lanka, teeming with terrific demons, is on the other side of the sea. It is  beautiful like the city of Indra's Amaravati.
3::48::11:: The beautiful city of Lanka  shines with its pale white ramparts and golden interiors. The entrance gates are encrusted with vaidurya (cat'seye).
3::48::12::It is crowded with elephants, horses and chariots. It resounds with the music of trumpets. The trees in the delightful pleasuregardens yield fruits in all seasons. 
3::48::13::O highminded princess, O Sita while living with me, you will not even think of other women.
3::48::14::O blessed lady of fine complexion, while enjoying both human and heavenly  pleasures with me there, you will not remember Rama who is a mortal of short lifespan.
3::48::15::Considering the eldest son a weakling, king Dasaratha has sent him away to the forest so that he could consecrate his dear son(Bharata).
3::48::16:: O largeeyed Sita dislodged from the kingdom, Rama has lost his capacity to think. He is doing penance, assuming an ascetic role. What can he do (for you)?
3::48::17::I am lord of all the demons. You should not reject me I am here (only because I am) overcome by the arrows of the god of love.
3::48::18::O timid lady if you reject me, you will regret like Urvasi who kicked Pururava and regretted later.
3::48::19::O lady of fine complexion, Rama is a (mere) mortal. In war he is no match (even) for my finger. It is your good fortune that you have got me here. Take refuge in me.
3::48::20::Thus addressed, Sita was enraged and her eyes turned red. She replied in harsh words to the chief of the demons in that solitary place:. 
3::48::21::Why do you wish to do something inauspicious by calling Lord Kubera who is worshipped by all beings your brother ?
3::48::22::O Ravana ,you are cruel and evilminded. You have no control over your senses. (And yet) you are the ruler of your breed. Surely they are going to be destroyed.
3::48::23::It may be possible (for some one) to live after abducting Indra's wife, Sachi, but it is not possible for any one to live after kidnapping the wife of Rama.
3::48::24::O demon, you may live long after forcibly snatching the most beautiful Sachi, from the hands of Indra, the wielder of the thunderbolt, but after abusing a woman like me, you will not be released from death even if you drink nectar.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे अष्टचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyeighty sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
