3::2::1::After receiving hospitality from the sages, Rama took of all of them at sunrise and entered deep into the forest.
3::2::2::With Lakshmana following, Rama went through the forest, filled with herds of animals and inhabited by bears and tigers. It was a place where trees, creepers and bushes were crushed (by frequent visits of demons). It was difficult to locate a water source.  And it resounded with the chirping of various birds and insects (crickets).
3::2::3::While Rama along with Sita was wandering in the forest infested with  dreadful animals, he saw a roaring cannibal resembling the peak of a mountain.
3::2::4:: He was of dreadful appearance with deep eyes, a huge face and a big belly. He looked tall, ugly and frightening.
3::2::5::Wearing a tigerskin, he resembled the god of death. With a wide, open mouth, wet with marrow and drenched with blood, he struck terror into  all beings.
3::2::6::Roaring loudly, he carried an iron spit in which were pierced three lions, four tigers, two wolves, ten deer  and the huge head of an elephant with its tusks smeared with the fat of flesh.
3::2::7::Looking extremely furious, he ran towards Rama, Lakshmana and Sita like the god of death rushes towards the (dying) people.
3::2::8::Making a dreadful sound, as if shaking the earth, he took Sita on his lap, stepped aside and said:
3::2::9::You both clad in bark and wearing matted hair, holding bows, arrows and swords have entered into the Dandaka forest with your wife. Your life has been cut short indeed৷৷ 
3::2::10::How is it that you both, dressed in the robes of ascetics, live  with a woman? Leading an unrighteous and sinful life, who are you who have brought disgrace to the ascetic discipline ?
3::2::11::I am a demon named Viradha. I move in this dense forest with my weapons eating the flesh of the sages.
3::2::12:: This  woman of fine hips shall be my wife. You sinners I shall drink  the blood of both of you in the fight.
3::2::13::Sita, daughter of Janaka was bewildered out of fear when she heard the cruel  and boastful words of that wicked Viradha.
3::2::14::Seeing the auspicious Sita in the lap of Viradha shaken out of anxiety, like a plantain tree in a strong wind, Rama with his throat parched said to Lakshmana:
3::2::15::Gentle Lakshmana, see the illustrious daughter ofJanaka, a lady of good conduct,  brought up in utmost comfort caught in the lap of Viradha
3::2::16::O Lakshmana whatever Kaikeyi desired through her boons has now come true so soon.
3::2::17::Kaikeyi, my middle mother is farsighted indeed  Not content with the kingdom alone see sent me, beloved of all  beings, away to the forest. Let her cherished desire be fulfilled.
3::2::18::O Lakshmana nothing is more sorrowful to me than the touch of Vaidehi by another. It is more painful to me than the death of my father or loss of my kingdom.
3::2::19::As Rama was thus full of tears of sorrow, Lakshmana sighed heavily in anger like a hissing serpant in confinement. And said:
3::2::20::O Rama, you are, like Indra, lord of all beings. What makes you feel sad like an orphan when I am at your service like a servant?
3::2::21::The earth will drink the blood of Viradha with his life gone, slain by my angry arrow.
3::2::22::Like Indra who hits the mountain with his thunderbolt, I shall release on Viradha the anger I felt against Bharata for his passion for the kingdom.
3::2::23::Spurred by the speed of my strong arms, my arrow will fall on his broad chest and separate his life from his body. Then his body reeling round and round will fall on the ground.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे द्वितीयस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the second sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
