3::65::1::Tormented and emaciated due to Sita's abduction, resembling the fire at the time of dissolution of the creation, ready to destroy the world, Rama looked at his bow strung again and again, breathing hot sighs like Lord Siva at the end of the creation, wishing to burn down the world in a rage. Lakshmana who had never seen Rama in such anger before said to him with folded hands and parched throat.
3::65::2::Earlier you were gentle, self restrained and engaged in the welfare of all beings. (Now) it is not proper for you to give up your natural composure in anger.
3::65::3::In you are always present the grace of the Moon, the radiance of the Sun, the motion of the wind, the forbearance of the earth and reputation.
3::65::4::To destroy the world for the mistake of a single person is not proper. Why and by whom is this warchariot broken with weapons and all its accesories I do not know.
3::65::5::O prince, this place is damaged by the hooves of the horses and the rims of the chariot. It is soaked with drops of blood.Very dreadful must have been the fight here.
3::65::6::O, best of the eloquent  this fight involves only one and not two. I do not see the footprints of a big army.
3::65::7::To destroy the entire world for one individual is not right. The lords of the earth should remain gentle, peaceful and punish only the deserving.
3::65::8::You are the ultimate resort and refuge of all beings. Who would like that your wife should be abducted ?
3::65::9::Just as pious men do not do anything disagreeable towards persons who observe religious vows, so also rivers, seas and mountains, gods, gandharvas and demons are not capable of causing unhappiness to you.
3::65::10:: O king bow in hands, followed by me and with the help of great sages you should search for the one who has abducted Sita.
3::65::11::We will search oceans, mountains, forests and several dreadful caves, rivers and lotusponds.
3::65::12::We will search relentlessly for the abductor of your wife everywhere including the world of gods and gandharvas till we find her.
3::65::13::O lord of Kosala when gods do not restore Sita on request, then you can think of taking action at the appropriate time.
3::65::14::O king if you fail to get Sita through appeasement, through humility or diplomacy then you destroy (the three worlds) by your goldtipped stream of arrows comparable to Indra's thunderbolt.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे पञ्चषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyfifth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
