3::31::1::Quickly did Akampana leave Janasthana, and quickly he entered Lanka. He said to Ravana:
3::31::2::O king many demons dwelling at Janasthana including Khara have been killed. I manged to escape with much difficulty.
3::31::3::When Akampana thus reported to the tenheaded Ravana, his eyes reddened with anger. He spoke to Akampana as if he was burning him with his eyes :
3::31::4::He who has destroyed my beautiful Janasthana is sure to die. His life is under the control of others (his enemies). Where can he be(alive) in all the worlds?
3::31::5::One who has caused displeasure to me cannot be happy, be it Indra or Kubera, or Yama or even Visnu.
3::31::6::I am the destroyer of the destroyer (Yama). I can burn even that which burns (fire). I can infuse Death with the characteristics of death itself.
3::31::7::If angry, I can burn the Sun and even fire with my radiance. I can arrest  the speed of the wind instantly with my effort.
3::31::8::Akampana, out of fear, implored the inflamed Ravana with folded hands and faltering voice to spare him.
3::31::9::The tenheaded Ravana, lord of the demons, assured safety to Akampana, who  gratefully said these words without hesitation:
3::31::10::Dasaratha has  a young son,  by name, Rama. He has a body like a lion's. He has strong, round arms and his shoulders resemble those of a bull.
3::31::11::He is a hero of great fame and unequal prowess. He has destroyed your Janasthana and also Khara along with Dusana.
3::31::12:: Having heard Akampana's words, Ravana, the lord of demons, sighed heavily like the king of serpents and said these words:
3::31::13::Did Rama come to Janasthana with Indra and the gods ? O Akampana   speak.
3::31::14::Hearing Ravana's words, Akampana continued telling about great Rama's strength and his exploits in war.
3::31::15::Rama is his name. He looks very radiant. He is the best among the archers. Owner of divine weapons, he is comparable to Indra in war.
3::31::16::He is strong with bright red eyes. He has a deep voice with the resonance of a drum. His face is like the moon. Lakshmana, his younger brother, is similar to him in appearance.
3::31::17:: Rama is prosperous. He is the best among kings. Lakshmana with him is like wind with fire. Rama has pulled down Janasthana.
3::31::18::Indeed, they are great men. No god came there (to lend him a hand). There is no need to investigate further about it.  The goldenfeathered arrows released by Rama turned into fivehooded serpents and consumed the demons.
3::31::19::Wherever the demons went they, gripped by fear, only saw Rama in front. O sinless sire In this manner your Janasthana was destroyed by him.
3::31::20::Hearing Akampana's words, Ravana said, I will go to Janasthana and kill Rama along with Lakshmana.
3::31::21::Thus said by Ravana, Akampana responded, I will tell you what happened there. O king   listen to the strength and valour of Rama.
3::31::22::Rama is of great fame. When outraged, he is irrepressible. He can arrest with his arrows even the speed of a river (in spate).
3::31::23::Powerful Rama can pull down the sky along with the planets and stars. He can lift the drowning earth from the depth of the sea.
3::31::24::He is so very powerful that he can drown the earth by breaking the boundary of the sea. He can arrest the speed of the sea or of the wind with his arrows.
3::31::25::He is a tiger among men. He is so powerful that he can destroy the world and recreate the creatures once again by his valour.
3::31::26::O tenheaded one, just as it is not possible for sinners to attain heaven it is not possible for you or for the entire world of demons to win him in war
3::31::27::I do not think it is possible for gods and demons together to kill him, yet there is a way for his destruction. You may listen to me with single mindedattention:
3::31::28::Rama has a wife in this world, by name, Sita, who is beautiful, has a slender waist and a wellformed body. Adorned with gems, she is a jewel among women, 
3::31::29::She has no equal among goddesses nor among gandharvis nor apasaras nor among demonesses. How can there be a peer of her among human beings ?
3::31::30::Abduct Rama's wife by force in that great forest and bereft of Sita, he will give up his life.
3::31::31::Ravana, the strongarmed king of demons, relished the words of Akampana and pondering over the matter, said to him :
3::31::32::Yes, early in the morning I will go alone gladly with the charioteer and bring Vaidehi here to this great city.
3::31::33::Having said so, Ravana got on a chariot yoked with donkeys. It had the colour of the Sun. It illuminated all directions. Ravana left.
3::31::34::The great chariot of the demon king (Ravana) flying in the sky shone like the Moon in the cloud.
3::31::35::Ravana reached the hermitage of Maricha and met him who was the son of Tataka. The demon king was treated with food that can be chewed and food that can be eaten.
3::31::36::Maricha personally offered Ravana a seat. He offered him water and paid him obeisance. Making meaningful enquiries he said in appropriate words :
3::31::37::O lord of demons  O king hope every one is fine in the world of demons. O lord, (though) your sudden arrival puts me in doubt (about everything going right). 
3::31::38::Having thus been asked by Maricha, glorious Ravana, who was eloquent in speech, spoke to him :
3::31::39::O dear, Rama who is capable of doing difficult deeds has killed my sentinels. The indestructible Janasthana has been routed in war. Could you help me in abudcting his wife ? (That is the only way to bring him to his knees).
3::31::40::Having heard Ravana ,the king of demons, Maricha said these words:  O king, who is that enemy of yours who, in the guise of a friend,  has told you about Sita? Though obliged by you, who is he that is not happy with you, O tiger among demons?
3::31::41::Tell me who asked you to bring Sita ? Who wishes to demolish the peak of the entire clan of demons ?
3::31::42::He who has encouraged you in this is your enemy, indeed. He wants you to pluck out the fangs from the serpent's mouth.
3::31::43::By  whose action have you been led into this wrong direction? Who has hit you on your forehead while you were sleeping comfortably?
3::31::44::Rama is like a mighty tusker. His pure and high birth is his trunk. His wellbuilt and strong arms are his tusks. His brilliance in his ichor. Nobody can face this intoxicated elephant in battle.
3::31::45::Rama is a lion in the form of man, a lion on warfront with its tail touching the waist when angry. This lion is deft in killing deer in the form of clever demons. His body is full of arrows. The sharp swords are his pointed teeth. It does not behove you to rouse such a lion who is asleep.
3::31::46::O king of demons  it is not proper (for you) to jump into the extremely fierce mouth of the nether world known as Rama. Who can steal the bow from his mighty arms which are whirlpools of mud. His arrows are rows of waves in the flow of the great war.
3::31::47::O lord of Lanka, chief of the demons, be pleased to return to Lanka and enjoy yourself in  the company of your wives. Let Rama enjoy with his wife in the forest.
3::31::48::Thus advised by Maricha ,the ten headed Ravana returned and entered his best of homes in the city of Lanka .इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे एकत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyfirst sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
