3::46::1::Lakshmana, brother of Rama, hurt by the harsh words of Sita, hastened with Rama's wellbeing in mind.
3::46::2::The tenheaded Ravana who was in hiding assumed the guise of a wandering mendicant and approached Sita.
3::46::3::And then Ravana wearing fine orange robes, with hair knotted on the head, carrying a parasol, wearing sandals, hanging a kamandalu (waterpot), and a staff on the auspicious left shoulder walked towards Vaidehi like a mendicant.
3::46::4::Mighty Ravana approached Sita deprived of both the brothers, Like darkness encompasses the evening twilight in the absence of the Sun and the Moon.
3::46::5::The extremely cruel Ravana saw the illustrious young wife of Rama just as Ketu looks at Rohini star in the absence of the Moon.
3::46::6::Seeing the ferocious Ravana, the huge trees at Janasthana shook vidently. Even the wind ceased to blow.
3::46::7::Seeing Ravana with his bloodred eyes, the swiftflowing river Godavari slowed down out of fear.
3::46::8::The tenheaded Ravana who was waiting for Rama's absence now got it. Disguised as a mendicant he stepped toward to where Sita was.
3::46::9::The evilminded Ravana in the guise of a holy man, like Saturn moves towards Chitra star, came close to Sita who was brooding over her husband.
3::46::10::Just like a well is concealed by an overgrowth of grass, Ravana guised as a holy man stood looking at illustrious Sita, the wife of Rama.
3::46::11::The wicked demon came close to that auspicious princess from Videha sitting in the cottage Her face was like the full moon. Her teeth and lips were lovely. She was clad in yellow silk. Her eyes were like lotus petals tormented by tears of grief. 
3::46::12::
3::46::13::Sita was the most lovely lady of the world shining in beauty. She was like the goddess of wealth (Laxmi) without her lotus. Ravana praised her thus:
3::46::14::Who are you with a golden complexion, clad in yellow silk, and looking like a lotuspond and wearing an auspicious lotus garland?
3::46::15::O lady with a beautiful face, with lovely thighs, are you 'hri', shyness personified? Are you the auspicious lovely Lakshmi, the  goddess of wealth? Are you the goddess of fame? Are you an apsara? Are you Bhuti, the goddess of fortune? Or are you Rati, the goddess of love moving at your free will ?
3::46::16::Your teeth are even and pointed, white and beautiful.Your eyes are large and clear and sparkling with dark pupils with a red tinge at the corner.
3::46::17::Your big hips are stout and strong, Your smooth thighs are like the trunk of an elephant, your breasts adorned with gems, are round and robust like palm fruits and drooping with heaviness with projected stiff nipples, shining and delightful, adding beauty.
3::46::18::O lady with an elegant smile, beautiful teeth, lovely  eyes you are enticing.Your slender waist can be compassed by my fist.Your hair is beautiful and your large breasts are rubbing against each other.You are capturing my mind  just as the flow of water in a river  touches its banks.
3::46::19::O beautiful lady I have not seen such a beauty earlier either among goddesses or among gandharavis, or yakshis or even among kinneris.
3::46::20::You are the most beautiful among women in the world. With all your tenderness and youth you are living in this forlorn forest. This maddens my heart.
3::46::21::It is not safe for a lady like you to reside here. Move out at once. This is only fit for the dwelling of horrible demons who can change their form at will.
3::46::22::You deserve to stroll in the terraces of palaces, in beautiful, luxurious and fragrant city gardens.
3::46::23::O beautiful, blackeyed lady, I think you deserve the best of garlands, best of food, and clothes and a suitable husband.
3::46::24::O best of women O lady with beautiful buttocks  can you be one  of the Rudras or Maruts or Vasus? To me, you appear like a goddess. 
3::46::25::Neither gandharvas, nor kinnaras, nor gods move here. This is only a dwelling place for the demons. How did you come here ? 
3::46::26::There are monkeys, lions, panthers, tigers, hyenas, bears, kanka birds and other wild animals here. How is it that you are not afraid of them?
3::46::27::O Charming lady how is it that although alone you are not afraid of the dreadful, swift, powerful wild animals like elephants in rut ?
3::46::28::Who are you, O auspicious lady ? Who are your people? Why are you here? From where have you come? For what reason are you going about alone in this fierce Dandaka tract, inhabited by demons?
3::46::29::Seeing Ravana, a villain in the guise of a brahmin praising her, Sita, the princess of Videha, honoured him with all hospitality.
3::46::30::She offered the handsome guest a seat first and then water for washing his feet with, and then invited him for food.
3::46::31::Sita, being a lady, was unable to doubt him since he came in the guise of a brahmin, holding a bottlegourd and a begging bowl. Without knowing his illintention she invited him in, mistaking him for a brahmin.
3::46::32::O brahmin, here is the seat for you. Feel free to sit. Here is water to wash your feet with. This is the best of food for you collected from the forest. Please partake this without hesitation.
3::46::33::Ravana was observing the princess from Mithila, wife of a king inviting him  and speaking to him in cordial manner. Looking at her, he resolved to  abduct her forcibly, inviting his own death.
3::46::34::Sita looked out for the beautiful figure of Rama who had gone to hunt the deer along with Lakshmana. Waiting eagerly for her husband, she only saw the vast stretch of green forest  but not Rama and Lakshmana.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे षट्चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortysixth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
