3::61::1::Rama, son of Dasaratha, saw the empty cottage devoid of Sita. The mats were displaced. He searched everywhere but unable to see Vaidehi lifted his lovely arms and said:
3::61::2::O son of Sumitra, where is my beloved ? Where did she go? By whom was she abducted? Or, devoured? O Lakshmana 
3::61::3::O Sita if you intend to make fun by hiding behind a tree, I tell you it is enough. Stop it and come to this extremely sorrowful man.
3::61::4::O gentle  Sita those fawns who trusted you and played with you, are now separated from you. Brooding over you, their eyes are brimming with tears.
3::61::5::O Lakshmana, I cannot live without Sita. I am filled with deep grief on account of Sita's abduction. My late father, the king will certainly see me in the other world (I will definitely commit suicide).
3::61::6::My father say will surely in the other world: Without completing the appointed period of the vow taken, how could you come here ? Fie upon you  You are irresponsible. You are ignoble. You are a liar.
3::61::7::O lovely lady where have you gone, leaving me here like fame deserting a crook? I am helpless griefstricken, pitiable, pathetic and disappointed. O lady of slender waist, leave me not. Separated from you, I will give up my life.
3::61::8::Deeply distressed, Rama who was anxious to see Sita, daughter of Janaka, wailed and wailed but could not see her.
3::61::9::Lakshmana, dedicated to his wellbeing, spoke to Rama, son of Dasaratha, who was sinking like an elephant into the quagmire, when he failed to trace Sita.
3::61::10::O longarmed, heroic Rama, do not grieve. This forest is full of caves. Let us try together.
3::61::11::Sita is madly in love with the forest. She might have entered deep into the jungle or into a fully blossomed lotuspond.
3::61::12::Maybe she has gone to take a dip in the river full of reeds and fishes  Or has hidden somewhere for the sake of fun.
3::61::13::O best of men, maybe Vaidehi has hidden in the forest intending to scare you and me. She wishes to test our love. O blessed Rama let us ransack the forest immediately.
3::61::14::O scion of the Kakutsthas, let us search all over the forest if you please. Do not indulge in sorrow.
3::61::15::When Lakshmana consoled him so affectionately Rama became composed. He continued the search with Lakshmana, son of Sumitra.
3::61::16::The two sons of Dasaratha went on searching for Sita in forests, mountains, rivers, ponds everywhere.
3::61::17::They were not able to find Sita even though they searched all over the mountain slopes, caves and peaks.
3::61::18::After searching her all over, Rama said  Saumitri, I am unable to find the noble Vaidehi on the mountain
3::61::19::Going about the Dandaka forest Lakshmana, consumed by sorrow, said  to his brother, glowing with brilliance:
3::61::20::O longarmed brother O wise sire  just as Visnu obtained the earth by binding Bali you will obtain Sita certainly.
3::61::21::Having been addressed thus by Lakshmana, Raghava with a griefstriken heart said these piteous words :'Lakshmana,having  spoken like that very affectionately to Rama,who was disturbed by excessive grief said these words piteously:
3::61::22::O wise Lakshmana I have searched the entire forest, the ponds with fully blossomed lotuses, the mountains with many caves and streams. But could not see Vaidehi who is dearer to me than my life.
3::61::23::Thus tormented by the abduction of Sita, Rama felt dejected and cried.Overpowered by grief he lost his consciousness for a moment.
3::61::24::By grief tormented, limbs enervated, intellect atrophied, senses switched off, he felt anxious and depressed and sighed long and hot.
3::61::25::Rama, his throat choked, shed propuse tears, sighing, O my darling.
3::61::26::Then Lakshmana, the knower of dharma and a dear friend offered obeisance most humbly with folded palms and consoled Rama in many ways.
3::61::27::Without caring  for the words from the lips of Lakshmana, Rama sobbed loudly, unable to see his beloved Sita.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे एकषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyfirst sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
