3::3::1::इति उकत्वा having said so, लक्ष्मण श्रीमान्  graceful Lakshmana, प्रहसन्निव  with a smile, विराधे at Viradha, कः भवान् who are you? वनमभ्येत्य having come to the forest, यथासुखम् at will, चरिष्यसि you are roaming about.
3::3::2::अथ then, विराथः Viradha, वनम् forest, पूरयन् filling with echoes, पुनः again, वाक्यम् words, उवाच said, पृच्छतः asked, मम me, ब्रूतम् whereabouts, युवाम् you both, कौ who are you, क्व where, गमिष्यथः going.
3::3::3::ततः thereafter, सुमहातेजाः highly effulgent, रामः Rama, पृच्छन्तम् when asked, ज्वलिताननम् burning countenance, तं राक्षसम् to that demon, आत्मनः his, इक्ष्वाकुकुलम् Ikshvaku family, उवाच described.
3::3::4::नौ both of us, वृत्तसम्पन्नौ endowed with good lineage, वनगोचरौ both moving in the forest, क्षत्रियौ two kshatriyas, विद्धि know, त्वां तु about you, वेदितुम् wish to know, इच्छावः we both wish, दण्डकान् in the Dandaka forest, चरसि you are going about, त्वम् you, कः tell.
3::3::5::विराधस्तु Viradha also, सत्यपराक्रमम् one with truth as his prowess, तं रामम् to that Rama, उवाच said, हन्त O, राजन् to king, राघव Rama, ते to you, वक्ष्यामि I will tell, मम myself, निबोध  know.
3::3::6::अहम् I am, जयस्य Jaya's, पुत्रः son, किल indeed, शतह्रदा Satahrada, मम my, माता mother,  पृथिव्याम् on this earth, सर्वराक्षसाः all the demons, माम् me, विराधः Viradha इति so, आहुः call me.
3::3::7::तपसा through penance, ब्रह्मणः from Brahma, प्रसादजा bestowed by his pleasure, लोके in this world, शस्त्रेण with any weapon, अवध्यता not to be killed, अभिसम्प्राप्ता has been acquired, अच्छेद्याभेद्यत्वमेव च  not to be cut or broken by any. 
3::3::8::एनाम् this lady, प्रमदाम् woman, उत्सृज्य on giving up, अनपेक्षौ without claiming her, त्वरमाणौ quickly, यथागतम् to the place where you came from, पलायेथाम् both of you may run, वाम् to you both, जीवितम् life, न आददे I will not take away.
3::3::9::रामः Rama, कोपसंरक्तलोचनः with eyes reddened due to anger, विकृताकारम् with deformed appearance, पापचेतसम् with sinful intentions, तम् him, विराधं राक्षसम् to demon Viradha, प्रत्युवाच replied.
3::3::10::क्षुद्र O vile creature, हीनार्थम् mean, त्वाम् you, धिक् fie upon, ध्रुवम् surely, मृत्युम् death, अन्वेषसे you are seeking, सन्तिष्ठ stay, रणे in war, प्राप्स्यसे you will attain, जीवन् while being alive, मे me, न गमिष्यासि you will not go.
3::3::11::ततः then, रामः Rama, धनुः bow, सज्यम् strung, कृत्वा after setting, सुनिशितान् sharp, शरान् arrows, सुशीघ्रम् quickly, अभिसन्धाय after aiming, राक्षसम् rakshasa, निजघान hit,  ह indeed.
3::3::12::धनुषा bow, ज्यागुणवता string tied, महावेगान् swift ones, सुपर्णानिलतुल्यगान् in speed comparable to Garuda and the windgod, रुक्मपुङ्खान् with bright feathers, सप्त बाणान् seven arrows, मुमोच ह verily released.
3::3::13::पावकोपमाः looking like fire, ते they, बर्हिणवाससः arrows tied with peacock feathers, विराधस्य Viradha's, शरीरम् body, भित्त्वा after piercing, शोणितादिग्धाः drenched in blood, धरण्याम् on the ground, निपेतुः fell.
3::3::14::विद्धः Pierced, सः he, राक्षसः that rakshasa, तदा then, वैदेहीम् Sita, न्यस्य  left her, शूलम् a spear, उद्यम्य after lifting, सुसङ्कृद्धः with intense anger, सलक्ष्मणम् with Lakshmana, रामम् towards Rama, अभ्यद्रवत् ran towards.
3::3::15::तदा then, सः that, महानादम् loud noise, विनद्य producing, शक्रध्वजोपमम् like Indra's banner, शूलम् spike, प्रगृह्य taking, व्यात्ताननः with wide open mouth, अन्तकः god of death, इव like, अशोभत shone.
3::3::16::अथ and then, तौ both, भ्रातरौ brothers, कालान्तकयमोपमे looking like Yama, the god of death, तस्मिन् at him, राक्षसे  at that  demon, विराधे on Viradha, दीप्तम् bright, शरवर्षम् rain of arrows, ववर्षतुः showered.
3::3::17::महारौद्रः extremely frightening, सः राक्षस: that rakshasa, प्रहस्य after laughing, स्थित्वा  stood there, अजृम्भत yawned, जृम्भमाणस्य as he was yawning, कायात् from the body, आशुगाः swiftmoving, ते बाणाः those arrows, निष्पेतुः fell down.
3::3::18::राक्षसः demon, विराधः Viradha, वरदानेन by virtue of a boon, स्पर्शात् तु by touch as well, प्राणान् (Prana, Apana, Vyana, Udana, and Samana) vital breath, संरोध्य  controlled, शूलम्  spike, उद्यम्य on taking out, राघवौ Rama and Lakshmana, अभ्यधावत ran after.
3::3::19::शस्त्रभृताम् among the wielders of bows, वरः best, रामः Rama, ज्वलनोपमम् like burning fire, वज्रसङ्काशम् resembling thunderbolt, तत् that, शूलम्  spike, द्वाभ्याम् with two, शराभ्याम् arrows, गगने in the sky, चिच्छेद broke asunder.
3::3::20::रामविशिखैः by Rama's arrow, छिन्नम् broken, तत् शूलम् spike, भुवि on the ground, अपतत् fell, अशनिना by the thunder, छिन्नम् broken into pieces, मेरोः of mount Meru, शिलातलम् इव like a slab, पपात fell down.
3::3::21::तदा then, तौ both, उद्यतौ coming on, कृष्णसर्पोपमौ both looking like black serpents, शुभौ auspicious, ख़ड्गौ the two swords, क्षिप्रम् quickly, उद्यम्य raising, तूर्णम् at once, तस्य at him, आपेततुः fell upon, बलात् strongly, प्रहरताम् struck  तस्य him.
3::3::22::वध्यमानः being struck, रौद्रः angry one, सः he, अप्रकम्प्यौ the unshakeable two, नरव्याघ्रौ two tigerlike men, तौ both, भुजाभ्याम् with his arms, सुभृशम् tightly, परिगृह्य holding, प्रस्थातुम् to set out, ऐच्छत intended.
3::3::23::तस्य his, अभिप्रायम् intention, आज्ञाय having understood, रामः Rama, लक्ष्मणम् to Lakshmana, अब्रवीत् said, अयं राक्षसः this demon, अनेन पथा by this path, अलम् no need to prohibit, वहतु तावत् let him carry us.
3::3::24::सौमित्रे O Lakshmana, राक्षसः the demon, यथा as, इच्छति wishes to go, तथा like that, वहतु let him carry, निशाचरः nightstalker येन by which ever, याति moves, अयमेव this alone, सः such, पन्थाः हि direction only.
3::3::25::अतिबलोद्धतः one puffed with great strength, सः that Viradha, निशाचरः तु rakshasa on his part, स्वबलवीर्येण by his own strength, समुत्क्षिप्य after lifting, बालाविव like two children, स्कन्धगतौ on both his shoulders, चकार made.
3::3::26::ततः then, रजनीचरः the nightstalker, विराधः Viradha, तौ both राघवौ Rama and Lakshmana, स्कन्धम् on the shoulders, आरोप्य keeping, घोरम् dreadfuly, विनदन् while screaming, वनम् अभिमुखः towards the forest, जगाम proceeded.
3::3::27::महामेघनिभम् looking like a huge cloud, महद्भि: with huge ones, विविधैः of different kinds, द्रुमैः by trees, उपेतम् filled with, नानाविधैः different kinds, पक्षिकुलैः flocks of birds, विचित्रम् wonderful, शिवायुतम् full of jackals, व्यालमृगैः with wild animals, विकीर्णम् covered with, वनम् forest, प्रविष्टः entered.
