3::74::1::तौ both, नृवरात्मजौ the two princes, वने in the forest, प्रतीचीं दिशम् western direction showed by, गृह्य took, कबन्धेन by Kabandha, दर्शितं shown by, तम् him, पम्पायाः Pampa's, मार्गम् way, प्रतस्थतुः both set out.
3::74::2::तौ रामलक्ष्मणौ Rama and Lakshmana, शैलेषु in the mountain, आचितान् loaded with, क्षौद्रकल्पफलान् honey like fruits, द्रुमान् trees, वीक्षन्तौ seeing, सुग्रीवम् Sugriva, द्रष्टुम् to see, जग्मतुः both went.
3::74::3::राघवौ Rama, तौ रामलक्ष्मणौ both Rama and Lakshmana, शैलपृष्ठे on the slope of the mountain, वासम् stay, कृत्वा made, पम्पायाः Pampa's, पश्चिमं तीरम् western bank, उपतस्थतुः started on that path.
3::74::4::ततः then, तौ both, पम्पायाः Pampa, पुष्करिण्याः of the tank, पश्चिमम् western, तीरम्  bank, आसाद्य reached, तत्र there, शबर्याः of Sabari, रम्यम् delightful, आश्रमम् hermitage, अपश्यताम् observed.
3::74::5::तौ they both, तम् that, आश्रमम् hermitge, आसाद्य after reaching, बहुभिः with many, द्रुमैः with many trees, आवृतम् surrounded, सुरम्यम् very beautiful, अभिवीक्षन्तौ both looking at, शबरीम् Sabari's, अभ्युपेयतुः went towards.
3::74::6::तदा then, सिद्धा an accomplished ascetic, तौ both, दृष्ट्वा after seeing, कृताञ्जलिः joined palms and offered obeisance, समुत्थाय having got up, रामस्य Rama's, धीमतः sagacious, लक्ष्मणस्य च and Lakshmana's, पादौ feet, जग्राह held.
3::74::7::पाद्यम् water to wash feet, आचमनीयं च and water to sip, सर्वम् all, यथाविधि as per tradition, प्रादात् she offered, ततः then, संशितव्रताम्  doing penance, ताम् of yours, श्रमणीम् austere woman, रामः Rama, उवाच said:
3::74::8::तपोधने  endowed with the wealth of penance(the ascetic), ते your, विघ्नाः obstacles, निर्जिताः कच्चित् hope you have overcome, ते your, तपः penance, वर्धते कच्चित्  progressing indeed, ते your, क्रोधः anger, आहारश्च desire for food, नियतः कच्चित् is controlled indeed?
3::74::9::चारुभाषिणि sweettongued, ते you, नियमाः selfcontrol, प्राप्ताः कच्चित् have you attained , ते your, मनसः mind, सुखं कच्चित् attained peace, ते your, गुरुशुश्रूषा serving the preceptor, सफला कच्चित् has yielded results? 
3::74::10::रामेण by Rama, पृष्टा enquired, सिद्धा an accomplished ascetic, सिद्धसम्मता a lady adored and accepted by siddhas, तापसी ascetic, वृद्धा old woman, सा शबरी that Sabari, प्रत्युपस्थिता standing in front, रामाय to Rama, शशंस she spoke.
3::74::11::अद्य now, तव your, संदर्शनात् by seeing you, मया by me, तपस्सिद्धि: fulfilment of my penance, प्राप्ता is attained, अद्य now, मे my, तप्तम् penance, सफलम् successful, गुरवश्च preceptors, सुपूजिता: have been honoured.
3::74::12::पुरुषर्षभ best  of men, देववरे best among  gods, त्वयि when you, पूजिते worshipped, अद्य now, मे my, जन्म birth, सफलम् fruitful, स्वर्गश्चैव even heaven, भविष्यति is certain.
3::74::13::रघुनन्दन O delight of the Raghus, तव your, सौम्येन by your handsome, चक्षुषा looks, पूता  sanctified, अस्मि I am, अरिन्दम O subduer of enemies, त्वत्प्रसादात् by your grace, अक्षयान् imperishable, लोकान् worlds, गमिष्यामि I will reach.
3::74::14::अहम् I, यान् those men, पर्यचारिषम् I have served, ते they, त्वयि when you, चित्रकूटम् Chitrakutam, प्राप्ते arrived, अतुलप्रभैः with incomparable radiance, विमानैः with aerial chariots, इतः from here, दिवम् to heaven, आरूढाः I will reach.
3::74::15::धर्मज्ञैः by knowers of rigteousness, महाभागैः by the honourable, तैः महर्षिभिः by those great seers, अहम् I, उक्ता have been told, रामः Rama, ते your, सुपुण्यम् very sacred, इमम् आश्रमम् this hermitage, अगमिष्यति will come, सौमित्रिसहितः along with Saumitri, सः he, ते for you, अतिथिः guest, प्रतिग्रहीतव्यः receive with due reverence, तम् him, दृष्ट्वा after seeing, त्वम् you, वरान् great, अक्षयान् inexhaustible, लोकान् worlds, गमिष्यसि you will go,
3::74::16::पुरुषव्याघ्र O best among men, (रघुनन्दन delight of the Raghus), मया by me, तव अर्थे for your sake, पम्पायाः Pampa's, तीरसम्भवम् grown on the bank, विविधम् many kinds, वन्यम्   forestfood, सञ्चितम् collected.
3::74::17::शबर्या by Sabari, एवम् in that way, उक्तः addressed, धर्मात्मा righteous, सः राघवः that Rama, नित्यम् always, विज्ञाने in knowledge, अबहिष्क्रताम् not kept away, तां शबरीम् that Sabari, प्राह he said.
3::74::18::महात्मनः by the great self, दनोः सकाशात् from Danu, श्रुतम् heard, ते your, प्रभावम् power, मन्यसे यदि if you think so, प्रत्यक्षम् directly, (सं)द्रष्टुम् to see, इच्छामि I desire.
3::74::19::शबरी Sabari, रामवक्त्रात् from Rama's mouth, विनिस्सृतम् released, एतत् this, वचनम् word, श्रुत्वा on hearing, तौ उभौ both of them, महत् great, तत् that, वनम् garden, दर्शयामास started showing.
3::74::20::रघुनन्दन O delight of the Raghus, मेघघनप्रख्यम् looking like the dense cloud, मृगपक्षिसमाकुलम् filled with animals and birds, मतङ्गवनमित्येव known as Matanga garden, विश्रुतम् popular, पश्य see.
3::74::21::महावने in this great garden, भावितात्मानः who perceived the supreme spirit, ते they, मे गुरुवः my preceptors, इह here, मन्त्रवत् by the power of mantras, मन्त्रपूजितम् invoked by mantras, तीर्थम् waters, जुहवाञ्चक्रिरे  performed  sacrifice. 
3::74::22::मे my, सुसत्कृताः revered ones, ते they, यत्र where, श्रमात्  exhausted, उद्वेपिभिः करैः did with trembling hands, पुष्पोवहारम् offering flowers for worship, कुर्वन्ति make, प्रत्यक्थ्सली वेदिः altar knows as Pratyaksthali, इयम् this is.
3::74::23::रघूद्वह O Rama, तेषाम् their, तपःप्रभावेण by the power of their penance, अतुलप्रभाः matchless brilliance, वेद्यः altars, श्रिया with glow, अद्यापि even today, सर्वाः all, दिशः directions, द्योतयन्ति filling with light, पश्य see.
3::74::24::उपवासश्रमालसैः weariness due to fasting, गन्तुम् to move about, अशक्नुवद्भिः having no energy, तैः by them, चिन्तिते by mere thought, अभ्यागतान् came towards, सहितान् all together, सप्तसागरान् all the seven seas, पश्य see.
3::74::25::रघुनन्दन delight of the Raghus, इह here, कृताभिषेकैः  after bathing, तै: by them, प्रदेशे place, पादपेषु on the trees, न्यस्ताः laid to dry, वल्कलाः bark clothes, अद्यापि even now, न अवशुष्यन्ति do not get dry still.
3::74::26::देवकार्याणि for the worship of gods, कुर्वद्भि: they offered, कुवलयैःसार्धम् along with lotuses  and others, पुष्पैः with flowers, यानि all those, कृतानि arranged, इमानि all these, म्लानत्वम् wilted, नोपयान्ति वै do not attain.
3::74::27::त्वया by you, कृत्स्नम् entirely, इदं वनम् this garden, दृष्टम् is seen, श्रोतव्यम् to be heard, श्रुतं च it is heard, तत् that, अभ्यनुज्ञाता with your permission, एतत् this, कलेबरम् body, त्यक्तुम् to give up, इच्छामि I desire to.
3::74::28::आश्रमः hermitage, येषां मुनीनाम् of  those seers (to whom this hermitage belongs), अहं च I, परिचारिणी I am a servant, भावितात्मनाम् realisers of supreme spirit, तेषाम् their, समीपम् near, गन्तुम् to go, इच्छामि I desire.
3::74::29::सहलक्ष्मणः along with Lakshmana, राघवः Rama, धर्मिष्ठम् dedicated to dharma, वचः words, श्रुत्वा hearing, तत्त्वतः truly, आश्चर्यम् wonderful, इति thus, अतुलम् incomparable, प्रहर्षम् happiness, लेभे attained.
3::74::30::ततः then, रामः Rama,संशितव्रताम् determined in her vow, श्रमणीम् female ascetic, उवाच said, अहम् I, त्वया by you, भक्त्या devotion, अर्चितः worshipped, कामम् verily indeed, यथासुखम् with pleasure, गच्छ you may go.
3::74::31::इति this, उक्ता was said, जटिला a woman of matted locks, वृद्धा old, चीरकृष्णाजिनाम्बरा woman wearing tattered bark clothes and deer skin, शबरी Sabari, जीर्णम् emaciated, देहम् body, तस्मिन् मूहूर्ते at that moment, जिहासती desiring to give up, रामेण by Rama, अनुज्ञाता permitted, आत्मानम् herself, हुताशने in fire, हुत्वा after offering, ज्वलत्पावकसङ्काशा body glittering like fire, स्वर्गमेव to heaven, जगाम went.
3::74::32::दिव्याभरणसंयुक्ता adorned with wonderful ornaments, दिव्यमाल्यानुलेपना wearing beautiful garlands and anointed with fragrant unguents, दिव्याम्बरधरा robed in most wonderful clothes, विद्युत् सौदामनी यथा like a streak of lightning, तं देशम् that place, विराजयन्ती illuminating, तत्र there, प्रियदर्शना pleasing appearance, बभूव appeared.
3::74::33::शबरी Sabari, आत्मसमाधिना her meditation, सुकृतात्मानः who did good deeds, ते महर्षयः the great sages, यत्र where, विहरन्ति  moved, तत् that, पुण्यम् sacred, स्थानम् holy place, जगाम went.
