3::70::1::Kabandha saw the brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, stand there bound by the shackles of his arms and said:
3::70::2::O bulls among the kshatriyas You are sent by destiny as food to appease my hunger. Seeing me hungry, why do you stand there with your senses switched off ?
3::70::3::Having heard this, Lakshmana, who was greatly suffering gathered courage at appropriate time and said these salutary words:
3::70::4::Before this vile demon gulps you and me let us cut off his long arms with our swords.
3::70::5::This huge, horrible demon with the strength of his arms has conquered the world, and now intends to kill us here.
3::70::6::O prince of the Raghu race  just as the animal brought in the midst of a sacrifice should not be killed, so also for a king to kill any harmless creature is despicable.
3::70::7::The cruel, ferocious demon heard them talk. He opened his mouth and attempted to eat both of them.
3::70::8::Then the agitated brothers, aware of time and space, quickly pulled out their swords and cut off both his arms from the shoulders.
3::70::9::While standing on the right, Rama cut off his right arm and the brave Lakshmana cut off the left.
3::70::10::The strongarmed demon, his arms severed, rumbling like a raincloud filling the sky, the earth and the quarters, fell down.
3::70::11::The demon with his arms amputated, drenched in a pool of blood  looked pathetic and asked them, Who are you? 
3::70::12::Imbued with auspicious signs, Lakshmana revealed the identity of Rama to great Kabandha.
3::70::13::Here is Rama, an heir of the Ikshvaku family, known to the people and I am his younger brother Lakshmana for your information.
3::70::14::He is equal to a god in prowess. While living in this desolate forest his wife has been carried off by a demon. We both came here searching for her.
3::70::15::Who are you with only the trunk of the body, and a glittering mouth in the chest with your calf muscles broken rolling down in the forest?
3::70::16::While hearing Lakshmana, Kabandha, reminded of Indra's words, replied to him in great joy :
3::70::17::O tigers among men you are welcome. It is my good luck that I am able to see you. It is my good luck also that the arms that bound you have been amputated.
3::70::18::O best among men hear how I have been deformed due to my haughtiness.इत्यार्ष श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे सप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventieth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
