3::62::1::The righteous, the longarmed,lotuseyed Rama, unable to see Sita wept with his senses overwhilmed by grief.
3::62::2::Under the spell of Cupid, Rama uttered such words in grief which are otherwise unutterable. As if he was seeing Sita (before him) which was not a fact.
3::62::3::O my beloved  as you love flowers you are hiding your body behind the branches of the Ashoke tree that enhances my sorrow (paradoxically).
3::62::4::O Devi I can see both your thighs which resemble banana trunk hidden behind a banana plant. It is not possible for you to hide them from me.
3::62::5::O gentle one  you are wandering in the karnikara garden, laughing and making fun. Enough of this , that causes my pain.
3::62::6::O my dear Sita, why are you joking when I am exhausted? Such fun cannot be relished  now.
3::62::7::O darling  joking specially in a hermitage  is not appreciated. I know your nature.You love fun. O largeeyed Sita, come here. This cottage of yours is empty.
3::62::8::O Lakshmana surely Sita is either devoured by demons or abducted. When I am weeping like this she is not coming to me.
3::62::9::O Lakshmana, these herds of deer with their eyes filled with tears are as if telling me that she is eaten away by the demons.
3::62::10::Alas, my noble lady, where have you gone? O chaste lady of excellent complexion, that queen Kaikeyi's desire will be fulfilled now.
3::62::11::I left home with Sita. How can I reenter the inner apartment without her ?
3::62::12::By Sita's abduction it will be  clear to the world that I lack manliness and compassion. My cowardly nature will clearly manifest. 
3::62::13::After completing the period of my exile when Janaka , king of Mithila, enquires of her welfare how can I face him?
3::62::14::If the king of Videha sees me without her, he will surely be distressed and will fall into a swoon for the love of his daughter.
3::62::15::Or else, I will not go to the city ruled by Bharata. Without Sita even heaven will be empty for me.
3::62::16::Go to the auspicious city of Ayodhya, leaving me here in the woods. I can never live without Sita.
3::62::17::While embracing Bharata tightly, repeat my words, 'You are permitted by Rama to rule the earth.'
3::62::18::My mother Kaikeyi, Sumitra and Kausalya  should also be offered due obeisance. You should protect them with great effort, carrying out my instructions.
3::62::19::O Lakshmana, subduer of the enemy this loss of Sita and me should be explained in detail to my mother.
3::62::20::When Rama, devoid of  Sita, the lady with beautiful hair, wailed piteously after reaching the forest, Lakshmana too, his face pale out of fear and mind dejected, felt extremely agitated.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे द्विषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtysecond sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
