3::70::1::बाहुपाशपरिक्षिप्तौ bound by the shackles of his arms, तत्र स्थितौ both stood there, भ्रातरौ brothers, तौ both, रामलक्ष्मणौ Rama and Lakshmana, दृष्ट्वा after seeing, कबन्धः Kabandha, वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
3::70::2::क्षत्रियर्षभौ two bulls among the kshatriyas, क्षुधार्तम् suffering from hunger, माम् me, दृष्ट्वा after seeing, किं नु why do you, तिष्ठतः both stand here, गतचेतसौ with the senses lost, दैवेन by god, आहारार्थम् for my food, सन्दिष्टौ  are sent.
3::70::3::लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, तत् that, श्रुत्वा having heard, तदा then, आर्तिम् suffering, समापन्नः he underwent, विक्रमे  to exhibit courage, कृतलक्षणः he has resorted to, प्राप्तकालम् appropriate time, हितम् good, वाक्यम् words, उवाच said.
3::70::4::राक्षसाधमः this vile demon, तूर्णम् quickly, त्वां च your, मां च and me, पुरा आदत्ते before he gulps, तस्मात् therefore, अस्य his, गुरू long, बाहू shoulders, असिभ्याम् by our swords, छिन्दावहै cut off. 
3::70::5::भीषणः horrible, महाकायः huge, भुजविक्रमः having the strength of his arms, राक्षसः demon, लोकम् world, अतिजितम्  having conquered, कृत्वा after doing so, इह here, आवाम् us, हन्तुम् to kill, इच्छति intends.
3::70::6::राजन् king, राघव of the Raghu race, निश्चेष्टानाम् of harmless creatures, वधः killing, क्रतुमध्योपनीतानाम् brought in the midst of a sacrifice, पशूनामिव like animals, जगतीपतेः lord of the world, कुत्सितः censurable. 
3::70::7::क्रूरः cruel, रौद्रः ferocious, राक्षसस्तु the demon, तदा then, तयोः them, सञ्जल्पितम् conversing, श्रुत्वा having heard, आस्यम् mouth, विदार्य widely opening, तौ them, भक्षयितुम् to eat, आरभत् made an effort.
3::70::8::ततः then, सुसंविग्नौ became agitated, देशकालज्ञौ knowers of time and space, तौ those two, राघवौ Raghavas, खड्गाभ्याम् with their swords, तस्य his, बाहू two arms, अंसदेशतः from  the shoulders, अच्छिन्दताम् cut off.
3::70::9::ततः then, दक्षिणः  standing on the right, रामः Rama, असक्तम् severed, वेगेन quickly, दक्षिणं बाहुम् right arm, असिना with a sword, चिच्छेद cut off, वीरः hero, लक्ष्मणस्तु Lakshmana, सव्यम् left arm. 
3::70::10::महाबाहुः with strong arms, सः that, छिन्नबाहुः with his arms severed, महास्वनः roaring, जलदः यथा like a stormy cloud, खं च sky, गां च earth, दिशश्चैव quarters, नादयन् while resounding, पपात he fell down.
3::70::11:: सः that, दानवः demon, निकृत्तौ with amputated, भूजौ arms, दृष्ट्वा after seeing, शोणितौघपरिप्लुतः drenched in the flood of blood, दीनः a pathetic one, युवाम् you both, कौ who are you, इति thus, तौ वीरौ those two heroes, पप्रच्छ asked.
3::70::12::तस्य his, इति thus, ब्रुवाणस्य when he was speaking, शुभलक्षणः a man of auspicious traits, सः लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, महात्मनः of the great self, कबन्धस्य of Kabandha, राघवम् Raghava, शशंस revealed.
3::70::13::अयम् he, रामो नाम by name Rama, जनैः by people, श्रुतः famous, इक्ष्वाकुदायादः an heir of the Ikshvaku family, माम् me, अस्य his, अवरजं भ्रातरम् as his younger brother, लक्ष्मणम् Lakshmana, विद्दि you may know me,
3::70::14::विजने desolate, वने in the forest, वसतः living, देवप्रभावस्य as powerful as a god, अस्य his, पत्नी wife, रक्षसा by a demon, अपहृता is carried off, याम् whom, इच्छन्तौ both wishing, इह here, आगतौ came.
3::70::15::त्वं तु you, कः वा who are you, कबन्धसदृशः appearing like a trunk, उरसि in the chest, दीप्तेन by a glittering, आस्येन with a mouth, भग्नजङ्घः with calf muscles broken, वने in the forest, किमर्थं वा for what purpose, विचेष्टसे you are rolling down?
3::70::16::लक्ष्मणेन by Lakshmana, एवम् in that way, उक्तः having been told, कबन्धस्तु the Kabandha, तत् that, इन्द्रवचनम् Indra's words, स्मरन् remembering, परमप्रीतः very pleased, उत्तरम् reply, वचः words, उवाच said.
3::70::17::नरव्याघ्रौ two tigers among men, वाम् to you, स्वागतम् welcome, अहम् I, दिष्ट्या luckily, पश्यामि I see, दिष्ट्या by my luck, युवाभ्याम् by both of you, मे my, इमौ these, बाहुबन्धनौ that arms which bound you, निकृत्तौ are cut off.
3::70::18::नरव्याघ्र O best among men (Rama), मे my, विरूपम् deformity, यत् such, रूपम् form, यथा as, अविनयात् due to haughtiness, प्राप्तम् is obtained, तव to your, तत्त्वतः exactly, शंसतः as I narrate, मे from me, शृणु you may listen.
