3::18::1::To  Surpanakha bound by the noose of passion Rama with a smile replied in a clear, lucid manner:
3::18::2::O lady I am married and here is my wife who is dear to me. To be a cowife to some one is indeed painful for people like you. 
3::18::3::Here is my younger brother Lakshmana. He is a man of good conduct, good look, valiant and virtuous. (Besides) he is not with his wife.
3::18::4::He is not with his wife, and is in need of one. He is young, handsome and worthy. He will be an appropriate husband to you.
3::18::5::O  woman of large eyes and fine hips, my brother is fit for you. You will (with him) shine like the radiant Sun on mount Meru. You will enjoy yourself without a cowife. You may approach him.
3::18::6::Thus  told by Rama, the demoness, deluded with lust, left him suddenly, and said to Lakshmana:
3::18::7::With my fine complexion, I will be a suitable wife for you. You can happily wander about in Dandaka forest with me.  
3::18::8::Thus addressed by the demoness Lakshmana, son of Sumitra, wellversed in the use of words gave her a befitting reply :
3::18::9::O lotuscomplexioned woman , how can you act as a maid to a slave ? Why do you intend to be so? I am already dependent on my revered brother.
3::18::10::O largeeyed one, you have a clear complexion. You may become the younger wife of my master who is lord of great wealth. And live a happy, fulfilled life.
3::18::11::He will abandon this uglylooking, unchaste, frightening old woman of drooping belly and accept you alone as his wife.
3::18::12::O lady of fair complexion and beautiful hips, which wise man will fall in love with any other female giving up a fine figure like you ?
3::18::13::While Lakshmana was thus making fun of the dreadful, droopingbellied Surpanakha, she presumed his words to be true.
3::18::14::Deluded with passion, Surpanakha said to formidable Rama, the scorcher of foes,  seated in the leafthatched hut along with Sita:
3::18::15::You are holding on to this lady who is ugly, unchaste, fiercelooking, flatbellied and  aged and not caring for me.
3::18::16::I shall eat up this woman now before your very eyes and I can move about happily with you without a cowife.
3::18::17::While speaking this, Surpanakha, with eyes like flaming amber ran to the fawneyed Sita in great anger like a giant meteor hurtling towards the constellation of Rohini : 
3::18::18::Mighty Rama in a rage restrained her who was falling upon Sita like the noose of death, and said to Lakshmana:
3::18::19::O handsome Lakshmana it is not proper to cut jokes with wicked, uncivilized persons. Now see Sita who has somehow survived.
3::18::20::O tiger among men, this uncouth, bigbellied, unchaste and highly passionate demoness deserves to be formed.
3::18::21::Thus instructed (by Rama), powerful Lakshmana took position by the side of Rama, angrily lifted the sword and cut off her nose and ears.
3::18::22::Dreadful Surpanakha with her ears and nose cut off, roared in a hoarse voice and ran away into the forest in the same direction as she came.
3::18::23::The dreadful demoness who thus was disfigured. Drenched in blood, she  thundered like a cloud in rainy season.
3::18::24::Dripping blood profusely, the frightful demoness lifted her arms and entered the great forestroaring.
3::18::25::A disfigured demoness, she fell down like the thunderbolt from the sky on the ground while her fiercelooking brother Khara sat surrounded by demons at Janasthana.
3::18::26::Thereafter the sister of Khara, wild with fear and delusion and drenched in blood, narrated all about the arrival of Rama, Sita and Lakshmana in the forest and her disfigurement.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे अष्टादशस्सर्ग।।Thus ends the eighteenth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
