3::10::1::भर्तृभक्तया out of devotion to her husband, वैदेह्या by Sita, व्याहृतम् spoken, एतत् this, वाक्यम् word, श्रुत्वा on hearing, धर्मे in righteousness, स्थितः steadfast, रामः Rama, अथ thereafter, मैथिलीम् to Sita, प्रत्युवाच replied.
3::10::2::देवि O Devi, धर्मज्ञे O one who knows righteousness जनकात्मजे O daughter of Janaka, कुलम् race, व्यपदिशन्त्या by admonishing, स्निग्धया affectionately, त्वया by you, हितम्  good, सदृशम् suitable, वचः words, उक्तम् is stated.
3::10::3::देवि O Devi, अहम् I, किन्तु but, वक्ष्यामि I speak, आर्तशब्दः cry of distress न भवेदिति  not  to arise, क्षत्रियैः by kshatriyas, चापः bow, धार्यते is held, इदम् this way, वचः declaration, त्वयैव by yourself, उक्तम् is spoken.
3::10::4::सीते Sita, संशितव्रता: practising rigorous austerities, शरण्या worthy of giving refuge, दण्डकारण्ये in Dandaka forest, ते मुनयः those sages, आर्ताः in distress, स्वयम् personally, आगम्य after coming to me, माम् myself, शरणं गताः sought refuge.
3::10::5::मूलफलाशनाः living on roots and fruits, धर्मनिरताः engaged in righteous activition वने in the forest, वसन्तः residing, क्रूरकर्मभिः by cruel activities, राक्षसैः by demons, भीताः are afraid, सुखम् happiness, न लभन्ते do not get.
3::10::6::काले काले at all times, विविधैः by different, नियमैः traditions, निरताः totally involved, वने in the forest, नरमांसोपजीविभिः living on human flesh (as cannibals), भीमैः by dreadful, राक्षसैः demons, भक्ष्यन्ते are eaten.
3::10::7::भक्ष्यमाणाः eaten up like that, दण्डकारण्यवासिनः living in the Dandaka forest, द्विजसत्तमाः best of brahmins, ते मुनयः those sages, अस्मान् to us, अभ्यवपद्य you may come to our rescue, इति like this, माम् me, ऊचु: spoke.
3::10::8::एवम् in that way, तेषाम् their, मुखात् from their mouth, च्युतम् that came out from, वचनम् statement, श्रुत्वा on hearing, मया by me, चरणशुश्रूषाम् bowing at their feet, कृत्वा having done एतत् this way, वाक्यम् words, उदाहृतम् said so.
3::10::9::भवन्तः you all, मे myself, प्रसीदस्तु be pleased, अहम् I, यत् that, उपस्थेयैः to be approached ईदृशैः by such men, विप्रैः by sages, उपस्थितः is approached, एषा this, मम my, अतुला immeasureable, ह्रीः हि shame in deed.
3::10::10::किम् what, करोमि can I do, इति this, मया by me, द्विजसन्निधौ in the presence of brahmins, व्याहृतम् was enquired, सर्वैः by all of them, एतैः by these, समागम्य collected together, इयम् this, वाक् voice, समुदाहृता was spoken.
3::10::11::राम O Rama, दण्डकारण्ये in Dandaka forest, बहुभिः by many, कामरूपिभिः assuming forms at will राक्षसैः by demons, दृढम् strongly, (cruelly) अर्दिताः are tormented, स्म we are, भवान् you, तत्र for that reason, नः us, रक्षतु may protect.
3::10::12::अनघ O sinless one, सुदुर्धर्षाः quite invincible, पिशिताशनाः flesheaters, राक्षसाः demons, होमकालेषु at the time of  sacrifices, पर्वकालेषु at the time of change of lunar conjunction like full moon or no moon days सम्प्राप्ताः are arriving, धर्षयन्ति are attacking.
3::10::13::राक्षसैः by demons, धर्षितानाम् oppressed, तपस्विनाम् helpless people, तापसानाम् of the sages, गतिम् direction, मृगयमाणानाम् for those who search for, नः for us, भवान् your, परमा supreme, गतिः refuge
3::10::14::वयम् we, तपःप्रभावेन by the power of penance, निशाचरान् nightrangers (demons), हन्तुम् to kill, कामं शक्ताः have the power, तु however, चिरार्जितम् earned over a long time, तपः penance, खण्डयितुम् to exhaust them, (वयम्) नेच्छामः we are not willing.
3::10::15::राघव Rama, तपः penance, नित्यम् always, बहुविघ्नम् is full of obstacles, दुश्चरं चैव but is difficult to pursue, तेन therefore, राक्षसैः by demons, भक्ष्यमाणाः even if  they eat us, शापम् curse, न not, मुञ्चामः we do not pronounce.
3::10::16::तत् then, दण्डकारण्यवासिभिः by those who are dwelling in Dandaka forest, रक्षोभिः by demons, अर्ध्यमानान् being tormented by, नः us, सह भ्रात्रा with your brother, त्वम् you,रक्ष protect, वयम् we, वने in the forest, त्वन्नाथाः हि you alone as the Lord.
3::10::17::जनकात्मजे O daughter of Janaka, Sita, च and, एतत् these, वचः words, श्रुत्वा hearing, दण्डकारण्ये ऋषीणाम् of sages of Dandaka forest, कार्त्स्न्येन in the entire, परिपालनम् protection, संश्रुतम् made a promise.
3::10::18::संश्रुत्य having promised, जीवमानः as long as there is life in me, मुनीनाम् of sages, प्रतिश्रवम् promise, अन्यथा otherwise, कर्तुम् to do, न shall not do, शक्ष्यामि I will not be able, सदा always, मे to me, सत्यम् truth, इष्टं हि is dear.
3::10::19::सीते O Sita, अहम् I, जीवितमपि even life, सलक्ष्मणाम् including Lakshmana, त्वां वा or you, जह्याम् I may forsake तु but, प्रतिज्ञाम् the promise, विशेषतः specially, ब्राह्मणेभ्यः to the brahmins, संश्रुत्य after promising, न do not (fail to fulfil).
3::10::20::वैदेहि O Sita, तत् that, मया by me, अनुक्तेनापि even if they did not request, ऋषीणाम् of the sages, परिपालनम् protection, कार्यम् should have been done, प्रतिज्ञाय even after making the promise किं पुनः what more?
3::10::21::अनघे O sinless, मम my, स्नेहाच्च out of love, सौहार्दात् friendly feeling, त्वया by you, इदम् this, उक्तम् is spoken, सीते O Sita, अहम् I, परितुष्टः pleased, अस्मि I am, अनिष्टः undesirable, न अनुशिष्यते हि is not advised.
3::10::22::तव your, कुलस्य of family, आत्मनः च of yourself, सदृशम् befitting अनुकूलं च favourable too, मे to me, सधर्मचारिणी follwer of dharma of husband, त्वम् you, प्राणेभ्योऽपि more than my life, गरीयसी dearer.
3::10::23::महात्मा great soul, रामः Rama, प्रियाम् to his beloved, मैथिलराजपुत्रीम् to the daughter of king of Mithila, सीताम् to Sita, इत्येवम् in this way, वचनम् statement, उक्त्वा on having said, धनुष्मान् wielding the bow, सह लक्ष्मणेन with Lakshmana, रम्याणि most delightful, तपोवनानि penance groves, जगाम moved about.
