3::6::1::When Sarabhanga attained the heaven, all the sages collected together and came to Rama whose radiance was like fire.
3::6::2::Vaikhanasas, Valakhilyas, sages who continuously wash their bodies, Marichakas Asmakuttas sages who live on leaves only, those who have teeth like mortar, Unmajjakas, those who use limbs as their bed, those who practise penance without using a bed, those who do penance in the open, unmindful of rain or Sun or wind, those who live on water only, those who penance under the open sky, those who carry on penance on high places like the mountaintop, those who recline on bare ground only, those who observe fast as a part of religious tradition, those selfrestrained men, those who mutter sacred mantras, those who constantly perform penance and those who stand under the blazing Sun in summer placing fire on four sides while performing penanceall these types of sages met Rama in the hermitage of Sarabhanga. 
3::6::3::All groups of sages, who knew dharma, and were upholders of righteousness reached Rama, the supreme knower of dharma, and said:
3::6::4::O great charioteer you are the lord of the Ikshvaku race and of the world just like Indra, chief among the gods.
3::6::5::You are renowned in the three worlds for your valour, for your devotion to father, and in you lies enough evidence of your adherence to truth and righteousness.
3::6::6::O lord, do excuse us. We sought your help to fulfil our needs since you are at hand. You are a great soul, knower and lover of dharma.
3::6::7::O Lord, a king who collect one sixth of the produce as tax and yet does not protect his subjects like his children commits an act of grave injustice. 
3::6::8::O Rama, whoever protects the inhabitants of his kingdom at all times like his own son who he loves more than his own life will attain the world of Brahma and remain there for long years and will achieve prosperity thereafter.
3::6::9::One fourth of the supreme merit a sage earns by living on fruits and roots, accrues to the king through which the people are protected righteously.
3::6::10::O Rama  we are a group of great sages, mostly brahmins, leading a vanaprastha  life. Yet with a protector like you, we are slaughtered in large numbers like orphans.
3::6::11::Come and see  the bodies of ascetics, who had perceived the Supreme Spirit, killed in large numbers in the forest by the fierce demons.
3::6::12::A great slaughter is taking place amongst those residing on the bank of the Pampa lake, near the river Mandakini, and on mount Chitrakuta.
3::6::13::We ascetics are not able to tolerate the fearful deeds perpetrated by the dreadful demons in the forest.
3::6::14::O Rama, you are worthy of refuge. Hence we have come to you seeking your protection. We are being killed by the nightstalkers. Save us.
3::6::15::O great warrior here on this earth there is no protector as mighty as you. So, O prince  save us all from these demons.
3::6::16::Having heard this, righteous Rama of the Kakutstha dynasty said to all the ascetics engaged in penance:
3::6::17::You should not speak to me this way. I deserve to be commanded by the ascetics. I have not entered this forest only on a personal mission.
3::6::18::I came into this forest in obedience to my father's orders to repel the aggression of demons against you.
3::6::19::I came here to acomplish your task incidentally, Therefore, my stay in the forest will yield great results.
3::6::20::I wish to kill in the fight the demons who are your enemies. O great ascetics, you may  witness my prowess supported by my brother. 
3::6::21::Brave Rama, steadfast in righteousness, worthy of honour, gave assurance to protect the ascetics endowed with the wealth of penance, and proceeded towards sage Sutikshna.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे षष्ठस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
