3::33::1::When the distressed, anguished Surpanakha met Ravana who makes the world weep, he was seated in the midst of his ministers. She addressed him these harsh words:
3::33::2::Intoxicated with the pleasures of passion, acting on your own, ungoaded and unguided, you do not understand the problems arising out of great fear, problems you ought to know.
3::33::3::Lustful and greedy, you are addicted to vulgar pleasures. People will not respect you like the fire on the crematorium.
3::33::4::A king who does not act at the right time will be ruined along with the kingdom and its works.
3::33::5::Just as elephants keep away from a muddy river, people will keep distance from the king who does not employ spies, does not give audience to his people and is not independent.
3::33::6::Kings who are not under their own control and cannot protect the country, do not attract the minds of the people like mountains inside sea water.
3::33::7::Having created enmity with selfrespecting persons like gods, gandharvas and demons, with a fickle mind and without spies how long can you continue as king ?
3::33::8::O demon  you are childish and foolish. You do not even know what ought to be known. How can you rule as a king?
3::33::9::The best among the victorious kings, who are not masters of their espionage, judicial system and their exchequer are equal to the laity.
3::33::10:: Since kings can see things from a faroff place with the help of the spies they are called farsighted.
3::33::11::Since you have not engaged any spy you do not know when your own relatives were killed in Janasthana. I take you to be a fool surrounded by ordinary ministers.
3::33::12::One Rama alone killed all the fourteen thousand demons including Dusana and Khara, demons  capable of fierce exploits.
3::33::13::Rama, the effortless performer of formindable tasks, has assured safety to the sages. Peace and happiness was restored to Dandaka forest but Janasthana has been ravaged.
3::33::14::O Ravana, you are not aware of what  has happened to your own kingdom. You are avaricious, intoxicated, and under others' control. A great fear has been generated in your own kingdom.
3::33::15::All living beings stop seeking refuge under a king who is, not a generous giver, but intoxicated, harsh, arrogant and fraudulent. They do not run to him for protection in times of calamity.
3::33::16::A king who is extremely arrogant, who is not acceptable to good people, who is selfconceited and cholerictempered will be murdered even by his own people at the time of adversity.
3::33::17::A king who does not do what ought to be done, does not fear what ought to be feared, will surely be dislodged from the kingdom and live a wretched life like a blade of grass.
3::33::18::Even dried up logs, or clods of earth, or a handful of dust may have some value but not a king who is dethroned.
3::33::19::Like a piece of cloth that is worn and discarded, like garlands put on  and crushed, a king dislodged from the kingdom is worthless even if he is capable.
3::33::20::A king who is alert, omniscient, has control over his senses, has a sense of gratitude and one of righteous conduct continues to rule for a long time.
3::33::21::The king who keeps both his eyes shut but keeps the eye of justice open, one who is free from anger and remains ever alert, is worshipped by the people. 
3::33::22::O Ravana you are evilminded. You  are devoid of all these good qualities. Your spies could not know that there had been a great massacre of your fellowdemons.
3::33::23::A king who accuses others, who is addicted to sensual pleasures, who lacks a sense of judgement of  place and time, a sense of discrimination between virtue and vice and the right wisdom will destroy himself and the kingdom in no time.
3::33::24::Ravana, king of demons, wealthy, arrogant and mighty, listened to Surpanakha and pondered over the mistakes she mentioned.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे त्रयस्त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtythird sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
