3::13::1::राम  O Rama, प्रीतः pleased, अस्मि I am, ते भद्रम् wish you well, लक्ष्मण Lakshmana, परितुष्टः satisfied, अस्मि I am, यत् to me, सीतया सह with Sita, माम् to me, अभिवादयितुम् to pay  reverence, प्राप्तौ have come , स्थः you both are.
3::13::2::अध्वश्रमेण due to fatigue caused by the journey, प्रचुरश्रमः much labour, खेदः affliction, वाम् you both, बाधते in troubling, जनकात्मजा Janaka's daughter, मैथिली चापि Maithili too, व्यक्तम् it is evident, उत्कण्ठते is anxious.
3::13::3::सुकुमारी च she is delicate, दुःखैश्च with difficulties, न विमानिता is not let down, एषा this lady, भर्तृस्नेहप्रचोदिता motivated by love for the husband, प्राज्यदोषम् full of difficulties, वनम् forest, प्राप्ता she came.
3::13::4::राम O Rama, इह here, यथा in whatever manner, रमते she feels like enjoying, तथा like that, कुरु do, एषा this lady, वने in this forest, त्वाम् you, अनुगच्छती came following, दुष्करम् difficult, कृतवती she has done. 
3::13::5::रघुनन्धन  O delight of the Raghu race, आसृष्टे from the beginning of creation, एषा this is, स्त्रीणाम् of women, प्रकृतिः is the nature, समस्थम् when everything is normal, अनुरज्यन्ति they enjoy, विषमस्थम् in hard situations, त्यजन्ति च they  give up.
3::13::6::योषितः women, शतह्रदानाम् of the lightnings, लोलत्वम् fickleness, शस्त्राणाम् of weapons, तीक्ष्णताम् sharpness, तथा like that, गरुडानिलयोः of Garuda (king of birds) and wind, शैघ्र्यम् speed, अनुगच्छन्ति follow.
3::13::7::भवतः your, भार्या wife, इयं तु this lady, एतैः by these, दोषैः demerits, विवर्जिता is free, देवी revered lady, अरुन्धती यथा like Arundhati, श्लाघ्या च she is praiseworthy, व्यपदेश्या च exemplary too.
3::13::8::अरिन्दम O subduer of enemies, राम Rama, सौमित्रिणा सह along with Lakshmana, अनया by her, वैदेह्याच with Vaidehi, यत्र whereever, वत्स्यसि you reside, अयम् this, देशश्च region, अलङ्कृतः is adorned. 
3::13::9::मुनिना by the ascetic, एवम् in that way, उक्तः being told, सः that, राघवः Rama, संयताञ्जलिः with palms held together, दीप्तम् burning, अनलमिव like fire, ऋषिम् to sage, प्रश्रितम् politely, वाक्यम् these words, उवाच said.
3::13::10::सभ्रातृभार्यस्य of me, along with my brother and my wife, यस्य मे of whom, गुणैः qualities, वरदः bestower of boons, मुनिपुङ्गवः great among the sages, परितुष्यति is pleased, धन्यः blessed, अस्मि I am, अनुगृहीतः favoured, अस्मि me.
3::13::11::किन्तु but, यत्र there, आश्रमपदम् the hermitage, कृत्वा after building, निरतः always, सुखम् happily, वसेयम् I may live, सोदकम् with water, बहुकाननम् with many forests, देशम् place, मे for me, व्यादिश direct.
3::13::12::ततः thereafter, धर्मात्मा a righteous soul, धीरः cool, मुनिश्रेष्ठः best among sages, रामस्य Rama's, तत् that, वचः words, श्रुत्वा on hearing, मुहूर्तम् for a while, ध्यात्वा after thinking, धीरतरम् more solemn, वचः word, अब्रवीत् uttered. 
3::13::13::तात dear son, बहुमूलफलोदकः a place with many roots, fruits and water, बहुमृगः a place with many animals, श्रीमान् beautiful, पञ्चवट्यभिविश्रुतः popularly known as Panchavati, शः that place, इतः from here, द्वियोजने at a distance of two yojanas.
3::13::14::त्वम् you, सौमित्रिणा सह along with Lakshmana, तत्र there, गत्वा after going, आश्रमपदम् hermitage, कृत्वा building, यथोक्तम् as told, पितुः father's, वाक्यम् words, अनुपालयन् while obeying, रंस्यसे you will enjoy.
3::13::15::राघव O Rama, ते for you, नरेन्द्रेण by the king, यः whatever, समयः time, कृतः is fixed, यः that period, तव your, कालः time, अयं कालः this period, गतभूयिष्ठः has been mostly spent, काकुत्स्थ Kakutstha, तीर्णप्रतिज्ञः one who has fulfilled his promise, राज्ये in the kingdom, सुखम् happily, निवत्स्यसि you will live.
3::13::16::रघुनन्दन delight of the Raghu family, राम Rama, ते जनकः your father, सः he, राजा the king, धन्यः blessed, यः who, ज्येष्ठपुत्रेण with the eldest son, त्वया by you, ययातिरिव like Yayati, तारितः is liberated.
3::13::17::अनघ O sinless one, तपसः of the penance, प्रभावेण by the power, दशरथस्य Dasaratha's, स्नेहात् due to love, तव your, एषः this, सर्वः all, वृत्तान्तः facts, मम to me, विदितः is known.
3::13::18::ते your, हृदयस्थः  of your heart, छन्द: desire, मया by me, तपसा by the power of penance, विज्ञातः is known, अतः therefore, मया सह with me, इह here, तपोवने in this penancegrove, आवासं residence, प्रतिज्ञाय after ensuring, पञ्चवटीम् to Panchavati, गच्छ you may go, इति thus, त्वाम् you, अहम् I, ब्रूमि telling you.
3::13::19::राघव Raghava, सः that, वनोद्देशः forest region, रम्यः हि is delightful, सः देशः that place, श्लाघनीयश्च praiseworthy, नातिदूरे च and not far away, मैथिली Maithili, तत्र there, रंस्यते will enjoy.
3::13::20::मैथिली Maithili, तत्र there, गोदावर्याः of Godavari, समीपे nearby , रंस्यते will enjoy, प्राज्यमूलफलश्चैव roots and fruits are plenty there, नानाद्विजगणायुतः teeming with a kariety of birds, महाबाहो long armed, विविक्तश्च it is a solitary place, पुण्यः holy place,   तथैवच in the same way, रम्यः is beautiful. 
3::13::21::राम O Rama, भवानपि you also, सदारश्च accompanied by your wife, परिरक्षणे in giving protection, शक्तश्च able, अपि च and so, अत्र there, वसन् while living, तापसान् ascetics, पालयिष्यसि you will protect.
3::13::22::वीर O hero, एतत् this is, मधूकानाम् of madhuka trees, महत् big, वनम् forest, आलक्ष्यते is seen, अस्य its, उत्तरेण northern side, न्यग्रोधम् banyan tree, अभिगच्छता while going towards, गन्तव्यम् you should go.
3::13::23::ततः there, स्थलम् ground, उपारुह्य getting to the elevated, पर्वतस्य of the mountain, अविदूरतः not very far from there, पञ्चवटीत्येव is Panchavati, ख्यातः wellknown, नित्यपुष्पितकाननः  where the forest is always in full bloom.
3::13::24::अगस्त्येन by Agastya, एवम् thus, उक्तः was said, सौमित्रिणा सह with Lakshmana, रामः Rama, सत्यवादिनम्  to the truthful, तम् that, ऋषिम् sage, सत्कृत्य after worshipping with respect, आमन्त्रयामास took leave .
3::13::25::तेन by him, अभ्यनुज्ञातौ permitted, तौ both, कृतपादाभिवन्दनौ worshipping his feet, सीतया सह along with Sita, तदाश्रमात् from that hermitage, पञ्चवटीम् to Panchavati, जग्मतुः proceeded.
3::13::26::समरेषु in wars, अकातरौ never frightened, नराधिपात्मजौ two princes, गृहीतचापौ holding bows, विषक्ततूणौ tying the quivers, समाहितौ made attentive, महर्षिणा by the great sage, यथोपदिष्टेन as per the directions, पथा by the path, पञ्चवटीम् to Panchavati, प्रजग्मतुः proceeded.
