3::64::1::Rama in dejection said these pitiable words to Lakshmana,O Lakashmana, go swiftly to the river Godavari and find out if Sita has gone there to get lotuses.
3::64::2::Lakshmana, destroyer of enemywarriors, went to the beautiful river Godavari with quick steps following the instruction of Rama.
3::64::3::Searching for Sita at the landings of river Godavari, Lakshmana said to Rama, I am unable to find her at these landings.No one responds to my call.
3::64::4::Where could Vaidehi, destroyer of sorrow, go? I wonder. I am unable to trace the spot where the daughter of Janaka could be found. 
3::64::5::Overwhelmed with grief on hearing Lakshmana's words, Rama himself went to river Godavari, and shouted, where are you, Sita?
3::64::6::Like the elements of Nature, river Godavari did not disclose Rama that Sita had been abducted by the king of demons who deserved death.
3::64::7::River Godavari (although) prompted by creatures (of Nature) to tell him about his beloved did not respond to brooding Rama.
3::64::8::Remembering the evilminded Ravana's appearance and action, the river revealed nothing about Vaidehi out of fear.
3::64::9::Disappointed by the river and emaciated by not being able to see Sita, Rama said to Lakshmana :
3::64::10::O handsome Lakshmana this Godavari does not at all respond. How can I go to Janaka and my mother without Sita and break this unhappy news?
3::64::11::Where could have gone that Vaidehi, who  removed all my sorrows and sufferings when I lost my kingdom and survived on food available in the forest?
3::64::12::Away from relatives and away from the princess, I keep awake during nights which seem too long.
3::64::13::I will roam about the river Godavari, Janasthana and this mount Prasravana till I find Sita.
3::64::14::O mighty Lakshmana these deer are looking at me again and again indicating that they wish to tell me something.
3::64::15::With his vision blurred by tears, Rama, the best among men, looked at them and asked them 'Where is Sita'?
3::64::16::Thus asked by the prince, all the deer got up suddenly, and pointed towards the southern sky, the direction in which the princess from Mithila was carried off. Looking at the Lord of men (Rama), they started running in that direction.
3::64::17::Even Lakshmana marked that the deer were showing and looking at the path lying in that direction.
3::64::18::Observing intelligently their indications and understanding the meaning of their message, Lakshmana said to his distressed elder brother:
3::64::19::O lord these deer are indicating the land on the southern side.Therefore it will be proper for both of us to proceed in the southwestern direction. Maybe we will get some clue or find that noble Sita.
3::64::20::Handsome Rama said, 'yes'and started in southern direction, carefully looking at the ground, followed by Lakshmana.
3::64::21::Talking with each other, the two brothers took the path on earth strewn with flowers.
3::64::22::Seeing showers of flowers fallen on the ground, valiant Rama sadly said these words to sorrowful Lakshmana:
3::64::23::O Lakshmana, here are the same flowers I had given Vaidehi to wear in the forest. I can recognize them.
3::64::24::I think the Sun, the wind  and the famed earth have done me a favour by preserving these flowers.
3::64::25::Rigteous Rama, the best among men, having said these words to the longarmed Lakshmana, asked mount Prasravana, full of streams:
3::64::26::O king of the mountains have you seen a lady with beautiful limbs separated from me in this forest tract ?
3::64::27::Like a lion aiming at a petty animal, angry Rama  said, O Mountain before I destroy  all your slopes show me that goldenhued Sita with lustre like gold.
3::64::28::Thus addressed by Rama, the mountain echoed as if it was telling about Sita but did not show her to Rama.
3::64::29::Rama, Dasaratha's son said to the mountain, The fire of my arrows will reduce you to ashes.You will have no grass, no tree, no twig. You will be unfit to be served any more.
3::64::30::O Lakshmana if this river does not tell me about that noble Sita with countenance like the moon, I will drain it dry right now.
3::64::31::While Rama was angry with his eyes burning, he saw on the ground as he advanced large footprints of a demon and then the footprints of Maithili which signified as if chased by the demon, she was frightened and was running hither and thither, longing to see Rama.
3::64::32::Bewildered to see the broken bow and quiver and many splinters of the chariot scattered all over, Rama said to his loving brother Lakshmana:
3::64::33::O Saumitri  see the many broken bits of gold ornaments and garlands.
3::64::34::See, O Lakshmana, the patches of blood looking like drops of shining gold spread all over the ground.
3::64::35::O Lakshmana, Vaidehi might have been cut into pieces, and eaten up by the demons who can assume any form at their free will.
3::64::36::O Lakshmana, two demons might have fought a dreadful duel at this place contesting with each other for the sake of Vaidehi. 
3::64::37::O handsome Lakshmana whose is this huge bow embedded with pearls and gems and adorned with gold fallen on the ground?
3::64::38::Whose is this shield of gold studded with Vaidurya, broken and strewn all over the ground, shining like the morning Sun?
3::64::39::Whose parasol is this with a hundred spokes, festooned with wonderful flowers thrown down on the ground with broken staff ?
3::64::40::Whose are these donkeys, with golden chestcoverings, with the devil's face, fierceful and huge and slain in the encounter ?
3::64::41::Whose war chariot with a battle flag is this, shining like burning fire, turned upside down and broken?
3::64::42::Whose are these pointless arrows of the size of a chariot axle adorned with bright gold destroyed and scattered ? Who is he that has performed such terrible deeds?
3::64::43::O Lakshmana  look at these two quivers filled with arrows and lying shattered.  The charioteer is holding a whip and reins in his hands and is lying dead. To whom do they belong?
3::64::44::O best among men, O handsome Lakshmana see these carriers of fans with head dress and earrings studded with gems lying slain in the combat. Whose are they ?
3::64::45::This indeed is the path the man or the demon has traversed. My enmity with him now has become hundredfold. This will end only with the extermination of his life.
3::64::46::O handsome one, those demons can change their form at will and are of dreadful nature. Have they abducted or devoured or killed her in this great forest. Even her righteousness could not protect the helpless Sita.
3::64::47::If Sita has been devoured or kidnapped, none in this world or even gods could do anything to make me happy, O handsome Lakshmana 
3::64::48::O Lakshmana even the compassionate and heroic Creator of the worlds will be disrespected by all beings, however ignorantly (if such things are allowed to happen).
3::64::49::The gods will certainly consider me a man engaged in the welfare of the world, a man of selfrestraint and compassion, but at the same time a weak man.
3::64::50::O Lakshmana even demerits turn into merits when they come in contact with me. Just as the Sun shines, effacing the moonlight, my brilliance will outshine my demerits of exterminating all (wicked) beings including the demons.
3::64::51::O Lakshmana, neither yakshas, nor goblins nor demons nor kinneras nor humans  will be in peace now.
3::64::52::O Lakshmana, just see, I will fill the sky with all my weapons and arrows and make all movements impossible in the three worlds.
3::64::53::I will obstruct the movement of planets and the Moon, destroy the radiance of the Sun, the fire and block the wind crush the mountain tops, dry up the tanks, destroy the trees shrubs and creepers and annihilate the oceans. I shall bring about this fatal change at once in the three worlds.   
3::64::54::If the gods do not return my Sita safely to me, O Lakshmana  they will witness my power right now.
3::64::55::Lakshmana no beings will be able to move in the sky, blocked by arrows released from my bowstring there will be no space left there.
3::64::56::O Lakshmna now beasts and birds will be confused and destroyed by my darts.You will see them crossing all limits of propriety.
3::64::57::For the sake of Maithili I will render this world devoid of goblins and demons with my irresistible arrows pulled up to my ears.
3::64::58::Now the gods will witness the power of my arrows released in great rage which can hit distant targets.
3::64::59::My anger will destroy all the gods, demons and evil spirits. They will be extinghished from the three worlds.
3::64::60::The worlds of gods, yakshas or even demons torn into shreds by my arrows will not  survive.
3::64::61::If the gods do not hand over Sita to me either carried away or dead I will transgress these worlds, O Lakshmana 
3::64::62::If my beloved Vaidehi is not given back to me in her true form I will destroy the three worlds with all animate and inanimate beings.
3::64::63::After speaking these words, handsome Rama, his eyes red with anger, pressed his bow, took out the glowing arrow that was dreadful like a poisonous serpent, fixed it to his bow and said these words in a rage like the fire at the time of dissolution of the world.
3::64::64::Just as all beings in this world cannot avoid age and death, or defy time and fate so also none can prevent me at all when I am  angry, O Lakshmana 
3::64::65::I will topsyturvy this entire world including the gods, the gandharvas, human beings, serpents and mountains if they do not show me the princess from Mithila, who is blemishless and whose teeth are beautifulइत्यार्शे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकेय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे चतुष्षष्टिमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyfourth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
