3::37::1::Having heard the words of Ravana, lord of the demons, wise Maricha who was also an eloquent speaker replied:
3::37::2::O king, it is always easy to find men who speak pleasing words, but it is difficult to get a speaker and a listener who use words unpleasant (to the ears) but beneficial (in life).
3::37::3::You  are fickleminded.  You have employed no spy ( who could have told you the truth about Rama's character). Rama is very brave and virtuous comparable to Indra and Varuna. Surely you are not able to know what Rama is.
3::37::4::O dear may there be good to all the demons in the world. If Rama gets enraged, he will make this world demonless.
3::37::5::Hope the daughter of Janaka is not born to put an end to your life. Hope I will not face any disaster on account of Sita.
3::37::6::I hope the city of Lanka along with the (entire) race of demons will not be destroyed, with a dictator like you who is a slave to sensual pleasure.
3::37::7::A king  who is a slave to passion, who is of bad conduct, of wicked thoughts, advised in evil ways destroys himself, his kith and kin and the entire kingdom.
3::37::8::Rama, the delight of Kausalya, has not forsaken by his father. He has never crossed the limits of dharma. He is not miserly. He has no  bad conduct. He is not a slur on the kshatriyas. He does not lack in righteousness. He is not cruel nor is he engaged in doing harm to others.
3::37::9::O dear, seeing that his truthful father was going to be deceived by Kaikeyi, righteous Rama himself offered to fulfil the promise of his father and came away to the forest.
3::37::10::To satisfy the desire of Kaikeyi and to fulfil his father's word he came to Dandaka forest,  leaving the kingdom and all royal pleasures, behind.
3::37::11::O my dear, Rama is not harsh nor ignorant. It is not that he has no control over the senses. It is not proper  for you to say what is false. You are illinformed.
3::37::12::Rama is dharma incarnate. He is pious. His strength is truth. He is king of all the worlds like Indra to the gods.
3::37::13::Sita is protected by the strength of her character. How do you desire to carry her away forcibly (from Rama) ? Can any one separate the radiance of the Sun from the Sun itself ?
3::37::14::You should not enter into the unquenchable fire that is  Rama,  the fire that has the  arrows (of Rama) as its flames and his sword and bow as fuel.
3::37::15::You should not give up happiness,your dear life and kingdom and come to Rama who is a variable god of death. His bow is  like on open burning mouth, and his flaming arrows are like fire. He is all anger. He is wielder of bow and arrows. He can strike the enemy army (alone).
3::37::16::Immeasurable indeed is the power of Rama to whom Sita, daughter of Janaka belongs. You are not competent to kidnap her, for she is under the refuge of Rama's bow in the forest.
3::37::17::Beautiful Sita happens to be the wife of Rama who is like a lion among men. Rama has a broad chest like that of a lion. He loves Sita who is ever loyal to him, more than his life.  
3::37::18::Sita is the darling of mighty Rama. With her slender waist, she is like the leaping flames of blazing fire and it is not possible  for you to touch her.
3::37::19::O chief of the demons, why do you make this futile attempt ? The moment you are seen by Rama in war will be the last of your life.
3::37::20::If you want to enjoy your life, happiness and even the kingdom which is not easily attainable for long, do not incur the displeasure of Rama.
3::37::21::After consulting all your ministers and the righteous persons led by Vibhisana, you may take a decision. Assess the real strength and weakness, merits and demerits  of your own and of Rama. Decide what is good or bad for you and then take steps you deem proper. 
3::37::22::O Ravana  I think it is not good on your part to confront the prince of Kosala in a war. Listen to my words and consider what is good for you.इत्यार्षे श्री मद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे सप्तत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyseventh sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
