3::67::1::Even though Rama was elder, he could grasp the quintessence of the wise counsel only after Lakshmana had said it.
3::67::2::Restraining his anger, the longarmed Rama leaned over  his wonderful bow and spoke to Lakshmana:
3::67::3::O dear Lakshmana, what shall we do? Where do we go ? Think of some means by which we can reach Sita.
3::67::4::Lakshmana said to Rama, afflicted with grief, It is proper for you to (first) search in this Janasthana, covered with different kinds of trees and creepers, and teeming with demons.
3::67::5::Here are difficult mountains, caves, valleys, dreadful caves full of different animals, dwellingplaces of kinneras and mansions of gandharvas.
3::67::6::Accompanied by me you should search for her in those spots. Great people endowed with wisdom do not destabilise in difficulties just as mountains are not shaken by the speed of the wind. 
3::67::7::Thus advised, the angry Rama fixed a sharp arrow to his bow and roamed in the forest accompanied by Lakshmana.
3::67::8::Then he saw the great Jatayu, a wonderful bird, looking like a mountain top, drenched in blood and fallen on the ground.
3::67::9::On seeing Jatayu looking like the peak of a mountain, Rama said to Lakshmana, There is no doubt that this bird has devoured Vaidehi.
3::67::10::This demon in the guise of a vulture has evidently eaten away the largeeyed Sita and is happily relaxing in the forest. With my terrific arrows with burning tips that can go straight I will kill him.
3::67::11::Having siad so, Rama took his bow, fixed the sharp arrow, and aimed at the vulture. The seabound earth trembled.
3::67::12::But the vulture who was in a piteous state, vomitting foamy blood, spoke these words pathetically to Rama, son of Dasaratha:
3::67::13::O Longlived one  she who you are searching in the forest like herbal medicine has been carried away by Ravana along with my life.
3::67::14::I have seen her snatched from you and from Lakshmana and carried off by powerful Ravana.
3::67::15::I descended down to protect Sita, and in the battle with Ravana his chariot destroyed fell down here on the ground.
3::67::16::O Rama this is his broken bow, this is his quiver and this is his warchariot all devastated by me.
3::67::17::He is Ravana's charioteer slain by my wings in the battle.  As I was exhausted in the encounter Ravana clipped my wings,  took Sita, and flew into the sky. You need not kill me. I am already slain by the demon.
3::67::18::Having known from Jatayu the story of his beloved Sita, Rama was full of tears, his grief redoubled.
3::67::19::Rama dropped the bow and embraced the king of birds. He fell down despondent on the ground and began crying along with Lakshmana.
3::67::20::Rama saw Jatayu breathing with difficulty in that solitary, inaccessible place.Overcome by greater grief  he said to Lakshmana:
3::67::21::I have been expelled from the kingdom. I am made to stay in the forest. I have lost Sita (my beloved wife). This bird (who was my wellwisher) has been slain. Such misfortune will burn even fire. 
3::67::22::Now if I enter even the great sea, the lord of the rivers filled with water, it will also dry up due to my misfortune.
3::67::23::In this world of the animate and the inanimate there is no one more unfortunate than me fallen into the trap of adversities.
3::67::24::This aged king of birds is my father's friend. To my illluck, he is struck down and is lying on the ground.
3::67::25::Saying such words and showing filial affection, he caressed Jatayu repeatedly with Lakshmana.
3::67::26::Rama hugged the king of vultures with servered wings, drenched in blood and asking him where Sita who was as dear to him as his life was, he dropped him and fell down on the ground.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे सप्तषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyseventh sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
