3::14::1::On the way to Panchavati, Rama, the delight of the Raghu race, met a vulture with a huge body and fearful strength.
3::14::2::Seeing the bird on the banyan tree, venerable Rama and Lakshmana mistook him for a demon and enquired who he was.
3::14::3::With a sweet, pleasing, and gentle voice he said to both of them, O dear know me to be a friend of your father.
3::14::4::Rama knew he was a friend of his father. So he enquired in a cool, composed voice his name and his lineage.
3::14::5::On hearing Rama's words, the bird started narrating the origin of all beings including his own family:
3::14::6::O mightyarmed Rama hear from me while I am telling you about the lords of creation from the very beginning.
3::14::7::O Rama among the lords of all beings the first was Kardama, the next was Vikritha, followed by Sesha, Samsrya Bahuputra, Sthanu, Mareechi, Atri and mighty Kratu, Pulastya, Angirasa, Pracheta, similarly Pulaha and Daksha.Following them were Vivasvan, Arishtanemi and the very glorious Kasyapa who was the last ruler.
3::14::8::O glorious Rama it is wellknown that Daksha, the creator had sixty daughters of great fame.
3::14::9::Out of them(daughters of Daksha) Kasyapa married eight women of beautiful waist called Aditi, Diti, Danu also Kalika,Tamra, Krodhavasa, Anala and Manu.
3::14::10:: Kasyapa, pleased with them said to his young wives, Beget sons of my stature who can rule over the three worlds.
3::14::11::O best of men, O longarmed Rama while Aditi, Diti and Kalika seriously considered his advice, the rest of the wives did not.
3::14::12::O Rama, subduer and scorcher of enemies to Aditi were born twelve Adityas, eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, and two Asvins, thirtythree deities in all.
3::14::13::O dear Rama, Diti bore glorious sons called Daityas and this earth with all the forests and seas belonged to them.
3::14::14::O subduer of enemies, to Danu was born Hayagriva and to Kalika, Naraka and Kalaka.
3::14::15::To Tamra were born, Krounchi, Bhasi, Syeni, Dhrutharashtri and Suki. Altogether they were five beautiful young maids famous in the world.
3::14::16::Krounchi gave birth to owls, Bhasi to Bhasa birds, Synei to bright hawks and vultures, Dhrutharashtri to swans and chakravakas with sweet notes.
3::14::17::Dhrutharashtri, a female bird of great lustre gave birth to chakravakas too. Suki gave birth to Nata and from Nata, Vinata was born. Be blessed, O Rama
3::14::18::O Ramato Krodhavasa were born Mrugi, Mrugamanda, Hari, Bhadramada, Mathangi, Sardooli, Sweta, Surabhi and Surasa, Kadruva and endowed with all virtues.
3::14::19::O best of men, all kinds of animals were born of Mrugi.To Mrugamanda were born bears and chamara (a different kind of deer).
3::14::20::To Hari were born lions, and swiftmoving monkeys and to Bhadramada, a daughter by name Iravati.
3::14::21::O bull among men Matangi gave birth to elephants.The mighty elephant Airavata who became the lord of the world was born to Iravati. 
3::14::22::O Rama, Sarduli gave birth to tigers and playful, roundbodied monkeys called Golangula and Sweta delivered elephants as sons for guarding the eight quarters.
3::14::23::Surabhi gave birth to Rohini and Gandharvi,the two famous daughters. May you be happy, Rama
3::14::24::O Rama Rohini procreated cows, and Gandharvi, horses as offsprings. Surasa delivered cobras and Kadru, ordinary serpents.
3::14::25::O Rama, bull among men Manu procreated brahmins, kshatriyas, vaisyas and sudras all famed human beings.
3::14::26::Anala (wife of Kasyapa) procreated trees with sacred fruits. Vinata was the granddaughter of Suki, and Kahdruva and Surasa were her sisters.
3::14::27::Kadhru produced a thousandhooded serpent(Adisesha) who held the whole earth on his head and Vinata, two sons, Garuda and Aruna.
3::14::28::I am born to Aruna and my elder brother is Sampati. O subduer of enemies, know me as Jatayu, son of Syeni.
3::14::29::If you so desire I will be helpful to you in guarding your hut. O dear, it is a difficult forest full of wild animals and demons. When you and Lakshmana are away I will protect Sita.
3::14::30::Rama worshipped  Jatayu and bending down, embraced him. He heard from him again and again several events relating to Jatayu's  friendship with his father.
3::14::31::Entresting the protection of Sita, the princess of Mithila, to that strong vulture,  Jatayu, and accompanied by Lakshmana Rama went to Panchavati wishing to destroy the enemies like fire burning the moths.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामयणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे चतुर्दशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fourteenth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
