3::56::1::Thus addressed by Ravana, Sita, immersed in deep sorrow and unafraid of him, placed  a blade of grass between her and him (intending not to speak to him  straight) and replied:
3::56::2::Rama is a son of  the renowned king Dasaratha, who was a firm ambankment (protector) of righteousness and was true to his promise. 
3::56::3::The longarmed, largeeyed Rama is famous in all the three worlds. He is my husband, a righteous soul and a god to all.
3::56::4::The brilliant Rama of the Ikshvaku dynasty with the lion's shoulders will come with his brother Lakshmana and take away your life.
3::56::5::Had you abducted me forcibly in his presence, you would have been lying down dead just as Khara in Janasthana.
3::56::6::Those dreadful, mighty demons you have described are ineffective in his presence just like the serpents who with their venom are ineffective  in the presence of  Suparna (Garuda).
3::56::7:: The goldtipped arrows released from his bowstring will shatter your body like the waves erode the banks of river Ganga.
3::56::8::O Ravana, even if you stand invulnerable to gods and demons, you will not come out alive in the combat with Rama with whom you have earned great enmity.
3::56::9::Powerful Rama will put an end to whatever little life you are left with. Just as a beast tied to a sacrificial post, you will not  survive.
3::56::10::O demon, you will be completely consumed if Rama looks at you with eyes burning in anger.
3::56::11::He who can bring down the Moon to the earth from the sky or even dash it down, he who can drain the sea dry will definitely release me from here.
3::56::12::Your life is coming to an end. Your fortunes will wane, your strength will be sapped. Your senses will be dissipated. By your deeds Lanka will attain widowhood.
3::56::13::This evil deed(of abduction) will not yield happy results.You have brought me from my husband from the forest without any forethought.
3::56::14::My effulgent, valiant husband armed with divine power resides fearlessly in the desolate Dandaka.
3::56::15::He will remove your pride, your power, your valour and haughtiness from your limbs with a shower of arrows in the fight.
3::56::16::When destruction draws near, people being prompted by time start commiting blunders in their deeds.
3::56::17::You vilest of demons, since you have assaulted me, the time of your death and destruction of all demons and of all women in the harem has drawn near.
3::56::18::The sacrificial altar adorned with ladles and vessels and sanctified by the sacred mantras recited by brahmins cannot be defiled by a chandala (man of lowest caste). 
3::56::19::O lowly demon  similarly I am a chaste woman and wife of the ever righteous Rama who cannot be defiled by a sinner like you.
3::56::20::How can a female swan ever sporting in lotusponds in the company of a royal swan look at the watercrow resting on a grassy land?
3::56::21::O demon  this body has (now) no consciousness. You may bind it or bury it. I do not think that this body or even this life need to be protected. But at no cost can I make this an object of censure on earth (must not be branded an unchaste woman).
3::56::22::Having uttered these very harsh words out of anger, the daughter of Videha, the princess from Mithila spoke no more.
3::56::23::Having heard such harsh, horripilating words from Sita, Ravana replied in a way designed to create fear in her:
3::56::24::O comely princess from Mithila, O lady with a sweet smile listen to my words. If you do not accept my hand in the course of twelve months, the cooks will cut you off into small bits for the (my) breakfast.
3::56::25::Enraged Ravana, who used to make enemies wail, turned to the demonesses and said these words.
3::56::26::Addressing the flesheating, blooddrinking, loathsome and fearful demonesses Ravana said, Humble her pride at once.
3::56::27::No sooner had Ravana said it than the dreadful demonesses offered obeisance to him with folded hands and surrounded Sita.
3::56::28::Stamping his feet and shaking the ground as if tearing the earth, Ravana said to those fiercelooking demonesses:
3::56::29::Let this Sita be led into the Asoka grove. There sit round her and protect her in secret (her presence there should not be made public).
3::56::30::There you all bring her under control through forcing and cajoling as one would do to tame a wild sheelephant.
3::56::31::Thus instructed by Ravana, the demonesses took Sita into the Asoka grove, which was full of perenmal fruits and flowers of different kinds, where trees yielded fruits of all seasons and birds were always cheerful.
3::56::32::Sita, daughter of Janaka, engulfed in grief found herself like a doe under the control of tigresses.
3::56::33::Sita, daughter of Janaka, immersed in deep grief knew no peace just like a doe caught in a snare.
3::56::34::Sita had no peace as she was threatened excessively by those women of deformed  looks. Remembering her beloved husband who was also her god, and overtaken by fear and grief , she fell unconscious.इतयार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे षटपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftysixth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
