3::1::1::आत्मवान् selfpossessed, दुर्धर्षः invincible रामः Rama, महारण्यम् great forest, दण्डकारण्यम् Dandaka forest, प्रविश्य having entered, तापसाश्रममण्डलम् multitude of hermitages of the ascetics, ददर्श saw.
3::1::2::कुशचीरपरिक्षिप्तम्  ceremonial robes(made) of kusa grass spread all over ब्राह्म्या of the brahmanas, लक्ष्म्या of auspicious appearance, समावृतम् surrounded, गगने in the sky, प्रदीप्तम् glowing, सूर्यमण्डलं यथा like the orb of the Sun, दुर्दर्शम् difficult to gaze.
3::1::3::सर्वभूतानाम् for all beings, शरण्यम्  shelter, सदा always, सुसम्मृष्टाजिरं the courtyard being wellcleaned, wetted and decorated, बहुभिः by many, मृगैः by antelopes, आकीर्णम् filled all over, पक्षिसङ्घै by flocks of birds, समावृतम् filled with.
3::1::4::अप्सरसाम्  by celestial damsels, गणैः by groups, पूजितं च glorified, प्रनृत्तं च and offered dances as service, विशालैः with vast, अग्निशरणैः with fire sanctuaries स्रुग्भाण्डैः with wooden ladles for offering ghee अजिनैः with deerskins, कुशैः with kusa grass, समिद्भि: with faggots (specially offered to fire in sacrificial ceremonies), तोयकलशैः pots filled with water, फलमूलैश्च with fruits and roots, शोभितम् adorned, आरण्यैः produced in forests, पुण्यैः sacred ones, स्वादुफलैः by sweet fruits, महावृक्षैः with huge trees, उपशोभितम् looking delightful all over.
3::1::5::बलिहोमार्चितम् worshipped with various offerings and sacrifices, पुण्यम् sacred, ब्रह्मघोषनिनादितम् reverberating with chanting of the Vedas,अन्यैः पुष्पैः by other flowers, परिक्षिप्तम् scattered here and there, पद्मिन्या by a lotuspond, सपद्मया filled with lotuses, फलमूलाशनैः by those living on fruits and roots, दान्तै: selfrestrained ones, चीरकृष्णाजिनाम्बरैः wearing bark garments and skins of black antelopes, सूर्यवैश्वानराभैश्च glowing like the Sun or the fire, पुराणैः by the aged, मुनिभिः by the sages, वृतम् surrounded by.
3::1::6::पुण्यैः by holy people, नियताहारैः  with regulated diet, परमर्षिभिः by great sages, शोभितम् shining, ब्रह्मघोषनिनादितम् echoing with the chanting of the Vedas, ब्रह्मभवनप्रख्यम्  resembling the abode of Brahma, तत् that (hermitage).
3::1::7::ब्रह्मविद्भि: by those knowing the Supreme Spirit, महाभागैः by the venerable ones, बाह्मणैः by brahmins, उपशोभितम् was adorned, तत् that, तापसाश्रममण्डलम् groups of hermitages of the sages, दृष्ट्वा after seeing, श्रीमान्  illustrious, महातेजाः a man of great lustre, राघवः Rama, महत् great, धनुः bow, विज्यम् with loosened string, कृत्वा doing, अभ्यगच्छत् went forward.
3::1::8::दिव्यज्ञानोपपन्नाः richly endowed with divine knowledge, ते महर्षयः those great sages, रामं Rama, यशस्विनीम् highly reputed, वैदेहीं च Sita too, दृष्ट्वा on seeing, प्रीताः pleased, तदा then, अभ्यगच्छन् went towards.
3::1::9::दृढव्रताः steadfast in vows, ते they, उद्यन्तम् rising, सोममिव like the Moon, धर्मचारिणम् follower of  righteous path, दृष्ट्वा तु on seeing, लक्ष्मणं चैव Lakshmana too, यशस्विनीम् famed, वैदेहीं च Sita also, दृष्ट्वा तु seeing, मङ्गलानि words of benediction, प्रयुञ्जानाः uttering, प्रत्यगृह्णन् went towards and received them.
3::1::10::वनवासिनः (sages) living in the woods, रामस्य Rama's, रूपसंहननम् beauty of the body, लक्ष्मीम् splendour, सौकुमार्यम् tenderness, सुवेषताम् will attired, विस्मिताकाराः wonderstruck sages, ददृशुः saw.
3::1::11::सर्वे all, ते वनचारिण: those forestrangers, आश्चर्यभूतान् creating wonder, वैदेहीम् Sita, लक्ष्मणं Lakshmana, चैव too, रामं Rama, अनिमिषैरिव unblinking, नेत्रै: with eyes, ददृशुः saw.
3::1::12::सर्वभूतहिते in the welfare of all beings, रताः engaged, महाभागाः glorious, अत्र here, पर्णशालायाम् in a leafy hut, अतिथिम् guest, एनम् राघवम् this Rama, संन्यवेशयन् made him sit and rest.
3::1::13::ततः thereafter, पावकोपमाः comparable to fire, महाभागाः great ones, ते they, धर्मचारिणः followers of righteousness, विधिना as per tradition, सत्कृत्य after rendering due hospitality, रामस्य to Rama, सलिलम् water, आजह्रुः offered.
3::1::14::धर्मज्ञाः knowers of dharma, ते they, तत: then, पुष्पम् flower, फलम् fruit, मूलं root, सर्वम् all, आश्रमं च and the hermitage, महात्मनः to the great self, निवेदयित्वा having offered, प्राञ्जलयः with folded palms, अब्रुवन् said.
3::1::15::राजा king, महायशा: of great fame, जनस्यास्य of the people, धर्मपालः protector of dharma, शरण्यश्च  refuge, पूजनीयश्च worthy of worship, मान्यश्च respectable, दण्डधरः chastiser of evildoers, गुरुः a respectable one.
3::1::16::राघव O Rama, इन्द्रस्य Indra's, इह here, चतुर्भागः fourth part, प्रजाः people, रक्षति protects, तस्मात् therefore, राजा king, नमस्कृतः obeyed, वरान् best, भोगान् pleasures, भुङक्ते enjoys.
3::1::17::भवद्विषयवासि residents of your domain, ते to you, वयम् we, भवता by you, रक्ष्याः deserve to be protected, नगरस्थः residing in a city, वनस्थः वा or staying in the forest, जनेश्वर: Lord of the people, त्वम् you, राजा king.
3::1::18::राजन् O king, जितक्रोधाः men who have conquered anger, जितेन्द्रियाः selfcontrolled, तपोधनाः  asceties, वयम् we, न्यस्तदण्डाः cast aside the symbol of authority, गर्भभूताः like your children, त्वया by you, शश्वत् forever, रक्षणीयाः to be protected.
3::1::19::एवम् in that manner, उक्त्वा having said, सलक्ष्मणम् along with Lakshmana, राघवम् Rama, फलैः with fruits, मूलैः with roots, पुष्पैः with flowers, अन्यैश्च and by other, वन्यैः by forest produce, विविधाहारैः different kinds of food, अपूजयन् offered with reverence.
3::1::20::तथा like that, वैश्वानरोपमाः men comparable to fire, सिद्धाः men who accomplished spiritual pursuits, अन्ये others, न्यायवृत्ताः lawabiding people, तापसाः ascetics, ईश्वरम् divine Rama (who controls every one), यथान्यायम् in a fitting manner, तर्पयामासुः pleased with their words.
