3::72::1::Thus said by Kabandha, the two lords of men, the heroes reached a cave in the mountain and lighted the fire.
3::72::2::Lakshmana lit the pyre with big meteorlike logs on all sides and it burned.
3::72::3::As the flesh of Kabandha's body decomposed, if burnt slowly in the fire although it was like a huge mass of fat.
3::72::4::Mighty Kabandha shook himself off the funeral pyre and rose like smokeless fire, wearing a pair of clean clothes and a divine garland.
3::72::5::Thereafter shining brightly in pure clothes and wearing ornaments all over the body, Kabandha hurtled out happily and instantaneously from the pyre.
3::72::6::The effulgent Kabandha rose into the sky on a famous aerial chariot harnessed to swans. Seated on it, he illuminated all ten directions and spoke from the sky,'O Raghava I will truly tell you how you will get Sita, listen to me'.
3::72::7::O Rama there are six expedients (peace,war,marching,neutrality, alliance, making peace with one and waging war with another, for attaining your goal in the world. Only the unlucky can help the unfortunate.
3::72::8::Along with Lakshmna you are passing through a bad period on account of which your wife has been kidnapped and you, lying low, are experiencing great grief, O Rama 
3::72::9::O Rama, the best of friends  you should certainly make friendship with him. As I think over the matter, I do not see any success if you do not adopt this method.
3::72::10:: O Rama, listen. I shall tell you. A monkey named Sugriva has been banished from the kingdom in a fit of anger by his brother Vali, the son of Indra.
3::72::11::A hero of great selfrespect, he lives with four monkeys on a beautiful mountain Rishyamuka extending up to lake Pampa.
3::72::12::This king of monkeys is energetic with great strength and limitless lustre. He is humble and truthful, valiant, patient and intelligent. He is great.
3::72::13:: He is efficient, eloquent, brilliant. He is mighty and strong. (But) he is banished by his brother from the kingdom, O Rama  
3::72::14::O Rama he will help you as a benevolent friend in searching out Sita. Do not indulge in sorrow.
3::72::15:: O best of the Ikshvaku race whatever is due to happen cannot be otherwise.  It is not possible to transgress time (fate). 
3::72::16::O Rama, immediately proceed today from here to mighty Sugriva. Having reached him, make him your friend without malice in the presence of burning fire.
3::72::17:: Thinking that Sugriva is only a vanara king, he should not be disrespected. He has a sense of gratitude. He can take any form at will. He is in need of your help although he is very strong.
3::72::18::You are both young and able to do the work he wants. Whether his work is done or not, he will fulfil your task.
3::72::19::Born of Riksharaja, he is the offspring of the Sungod. He has developed enmity with Vali, and is roaming about the banks of Pampa, suspecting danger from Vali.
3::72::20::O Rama, with your weapons kept ready, go to Sugriva, king of the monkeys, a resident of Rishyamuka. He is wandering in the forest. Establish friendship with him.
3::72::21::He is the foremost of the monkeys. He knows well by his wisdom all the dwellingplaces of the carnivorous demons in the world.
3::72::22::There is nothing unknown to Sugriva in this world as far as the Sun shines, O subduer of enemies
3::72::23::Along with his monkeys, he will search all rivers, mountains and caves and will find out your consort.
3::72::24::Sugriva will find out the lady of purity and chastity brooding over you in separation in the abode of Ravana. He can send gigantic monkeys in different directions in order to search for her.
3::72::25::Sugriva, king of the monkeys, will reach the demons  and restore you that blameless, beloved consort of yours, even if she is there on top of mount Meru or in the deep underworld. इत्यार्ष श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे द्विसप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventysecond sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
