3::22::1::Ashamed and accused thus in the presence of the demons, the valiant Khara spoke to Surpanakha in harsh words: 
3::22::2::Like the overslowing salt sea water, I am unable to contain this my excessive anger arising out of your insult.
3::22::3::Rama is a shortlived human. I do not care for his valour. His life span will be shortened (he will be killed) now for his own misdeeds. 
3::22::4::Restrain your tears and your anxieties I will send Rama along with his brother to the abode of Yama.
3::22::5::With his life ebbing out, killed by my axe in the fight, you will drink today, O demoness, Rama's red, hot blood.
3::22::6::On hearing the words that came out of Khara's mouth, she was pleased. And in stupidity began praising her brother once again as the best of demons.
3::22::7::Khara, accused by her earlier and admired again, said to Dusana, chief of army:
3::22::8::There are fourteen thousand demons at my command ready to act according to my will. They are warriors of terrific speed and will not retreat from the fight. 
3::22::9::They are of the colour of the dark blue cloud, dreadful and merciless, strong and powerful fighters who roam about forturing people.
3::22::10::O handsome one, get them all, powerful like tigers, demons with large countenances, mighty and arragant, ready (for the fight). 
3::22::11::O goodnatured one, get my chariot, bows and arrows, wonderful swords of different kinds and sharp missiles ready quickly.
3::22::12::O expert in warfare, I wish to lead those great warriors of Paulasthya family, to kill that immodest Rama.
3::22::13::While Khara was speaking thus, Dusana reported that a huge chariot of the colour of the Sun yoked with good horses of variegated hues stood ready.
3::22::14::Then the impatient Khara mounted the chariot that looked like the peak of mount Meru. It was decorated with pure gold, had golden wheels, poles studded with vaidurya. The carriage of the chariot was engraved with golden figures of fishes, flowers, trees, the Sun, stars, flocks of auspicious birds, flags and swords. Shining with small bells, it was yoked to fine horses. 
3::22::15::The demons of terrific prowess surounded Khara and Dusana and stood by, when they saw both of them mounting the chariot.
3::22::16::Khara mounted the chariot, saw the demons holding great weapons, wearing dreadful shields and holding flags, and ordered them to march.
3::22::17::Then the army of the demons wearing dreadful shields, holding weapons and flags, and making a loud noise started in great speed from Janasthanam.
3::22::18::The fourteen thousand demons loyal to the wishes of Khara, took in their hands, maces, piercing weapons, spears, sharp axes used in battle, swords, wheels, splinters, iron clubs, powerful missiles, dreadful iron bars of giant size, bows made of bamboo, clubs and frightening weapons like thunderbolt (of Indra) and  departed from Janasthana.
3::22::19::Khara's chariot moved a bit behind the army of demons of frightening prowess who rushed forward to attack (Rama). 
3::22::20::Knowing the mind of Khara, the charioteer hastened the horses of the colourful  chariot decorated with pure gold. 
3::22::21::Spurred by the charioteer, the chariot of Khara, the slayer of enemies, produced a rattle that filled all four quarters and the intermediate directions.
3::22::22::Khara in extreme anger hastened, like Yama, to slay his enemy. He roared loudly like a cloud raining hail stones and impelled his charioteer to speed up. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वालल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे द्वाविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentysecond sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
