3::73::1::Having shown Rama the means to find Sita, Kabandha spoke again these significant words:
3::73::2::O Rama the delightful path going westward is auspicious for you. It is shining with trees in bloom. There are jambu (rose apple) trees, priyala trees, jackfruit trees, banyan trees, plaksha trees (a tree from which milky latex oozes out), tinduka trees, holy fig trees, karnikaras (of red and white flowers), mango trees and other trees like dryland, thorny trees, tilaka trees, trees that bloom at night, agnimukhya and asoka trees of blue flowers, kadamba trees, karavira trees, red ashoka trees, and paribhadraka trees.
3::73::3::Climbing those trees or else pulling them down with your strength, both of you eat the nectarlike sweet fruits and proceed ahead.
3::73::4::O scion of the Kakutstha race  proceeding further you will find another forest of the North Kuru state with trees in bloom resembling the pleasuregardens of Nandana.
3::73::5::The trees in that garden with fruits of all seasons drip honey. Like the Chaitraratha garden (of Kubera), it bears fruits of all seasons.
3::73::6::The trees with huge branches bent down with fruits look like mountains or clouds.
3::73::7::Lakshmana will get you the nectarlike fruits either by climbing the trees or by pulling them down.
3::73::8::O brave men, pass from hill to hill, forest to forest in great countries until you reach a lake named Pampa.
3::73::9:: The slopes of Pampa are without stones or pebbles, O Rama   They are not slippery slopes. They are without moss. The water is neither deep nor shallow. It has smooth beds of sand on the banks and it is full of lotuses and lilies.
3::73::10::Moving in the waters of Pampa you will see swans, ducks, krauncha birds and curlews cackling and cooing, O Son of the Raghus.
3::73::11::Not knowing that they may be killed, the innocent creatures will not be scared of human beings. Both of you can kill and eat the fat birds comparable to balls of ghee.
3::73::12::O Rama, scion of the Raghu dynasty  there at Pampa, by shooting an arrow at the choicest  fishes with a single bone, prawns and big fishes, crookedfaced fishes, fishes without scales and fins, baked on iron skewers and cooked will be offered to you by faithful Lakshmana.
3::73::13::While you delightedly eat the fishes, Lakshmana will fetch you water in a lotus leaf from the Pampa to drink. The waters of Pampa full of lotuses carry their scent, It  is enjoyable, cool, healthy and clear, resembling silver and crystal.
3::73::14::O best of men you will see huge boars of delightful appearance that roar like bulls resting in mountain caves, roaming in the forest and coming to Pampa for its water.
3::73::15::When you stroll in the evening, you will see the trees laden with blossoms and lake Pampa full of cool water. You will forget your grief.
3::73::16::O son of the Raghus  there you will see tilaka trees, night jasmines full of flowers. You will also see blossoming water lilies and lotuses in Pampa.
3::73::17::There is no one to wear those flowers. Those garlands do not wilt or wither O Rama
3::73::18::While drops of sweat from the bodies of sage Matanga's disciples fell on earth under the heavy load of forest products they carried for their preceptor, they remained in a calm state. Those drops of sweat turned into flowers and those flowers do not wither due to the power of penance of the sages.
3::73::19::O Kakutstha  even now their attendant, named Sabari, an old ascetic is there even though they have left long ago.
3::73::20::O Rama, she is established in righteousness, and you are godlike, and revered by all beings. When she sees you, she will attain heaven.
3::73::21::O Rama of the Kakutstha family, you will see on reaching the western bank of Pampa an incomparable site of hermitage concealed in a remote place. 
3::73::22::The elephants of the forest and on the mountains do not attack the hermitage forbidden by sage Matanga.
3::73::23::O Rama, you will enjoy your stay in that forest which is like Nandana garden, the garden of the gods, full of various birds.
3::73::24:: Mount Rishyamuka situated on the bank of Pampa has trees filled with blossoms. It is difficult to climb and is protected by young elephants.This lofty mountain was created by Brahma in olden days.
3::73::25::Whatever wealth one dreams of in sleep on top of that mountain he will get on waking up, O Rama 
3::73::26::If an evildoer or a sinner ascends the (Rishyamuka) mountain, he, in his sleep, will be thrown down with asleep by the demons from there itself. A sinner does not climb this mountain of uneven terrain.
3::73::27::O Rama, the trumpeting of the young playful elephants inhabiting sage Matanga's forest can be heard at Pampa.
3::73::28::The great, nimble elphants, dark like clouds, drenched with the flow of ichor come together and then separate and scatter.
3::73::29::The wandering elephants of the forest drink plentiful water, pure and cool, from Pampa and contented, plunge into the forest.
3::73::30::When you see, shining like sapphires, the bears, tigers, antelopes who know no defeat, you will get over your grief.
3::73::31::O son of the Kakutstha family, there is a beautiful cave in that mountain covered with a slab of stone. It is difficult to enter.
3::73::32::At the eastern entrance of the cave there is a cool watertank. On its bank teeming with various animals are delightful fruits and roots.
3::73::33::Sugriva dwells in that cave with four other monkeys. At times he sits on the top of the mountain.
3::73::34::Having instructed both Rama and Lakshmana, courageous Kabandha, wearing a flowergarland, shone brightly like the Sun in the sky.
3::73::35::Both Rama and Lakshmana, ready to depart, went near the glorious Kabandha waiting in the sky and said, You may go now.
3::73::36::Then Kabandha said to the brothers satisfied, You may go now to accomplish your task. Then he took leave.
3::73::37::Kabandha assumed his true form, his body shining like the radiance of the Sun. He stood in the sky showing his form and looking at Rama, said, Make friendship with Sugriva.इत्यार्ष श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे त्रिसप्ततितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventythird sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
