3::58::1::Rama, son of Dasaratha, the righteous self, saw Lakshmana downcast and dejected. Seeing him  without Sita, Rama enquired:
3::58::2::Where is that princess from Videha who accompanied me when I entered Dandaka forest ? Why have you come here leaving her behind ?
3::58::3::Where is that princess from Videha, a sharer of my sorrows, Sita of slender waist who followed this hapless prince disloged from the kingdom into the Dandaka forest?
3::58::4::O warrior Lakshmana where is that Sita without whom I have no interest to live for a moment, who was like the daughter of a god and a sustainer of my life?
3::58::5::O Lakshmana I desire no lordship of the gods  or of the entire earth without that daughter of Janaka, that lady of golden complexion. 
3::58::6::O gentle Lakshmana I wonder if Vaidehi, who is dearer to me than my life is still alive I hope my banishment from the kingdom is not going to prove false.
3::58::7::O Saumitri when I am dead on account of Sita, and you are back, Kaikeyi with her desire fulfilled will be happy, indeed.
3::58::8::O handsome one  I wonder if that lady of renunciation, Kausalya with her son dead, will have to serve Kaikeyi whose desire would be fulfilled, and who will enjoy the power of the throne in the company of her son
3::58::9::O Lakshmana, only if Vaidehi is alive will I enter the cottage again or else I will give up my life if that virtuous lady is no more.
3::58::10::I will die if Sita, princess from Videha, is not there to speak to me with her sweet smile when I return to the cottage, O Lakshmana 
3::58::11::Tell me, O Lakshmana   if Sita is alive or not, whether she was eaten up by demons when you were off your guard.
3::58::12::Vaidehi is delicate, young and she has never faced any sorrow.She will be certainly disheartened due to separation from me.
3::58::13::The evilminded, wicked demon calling out loudly 'O Lakshmana' must have by all means instilled fear in your mind.
3::58::14::I am afraid, Vaidehi, frightened by hearing the voice which was like mine sent you to see me, and you came all at once.
3::58::15::You have definitely done a great mistake by leaving Sita alone in the forest. This has given a chance to the cruel demons to wreak revenge.
3::58::16::The dreadful, carnivorous demons aggrieved over my murder of Khara must have undoubtedly killed Sita.
3::58::17::O destroyer of enemies  I am completely drowned in sorrow. What can I do at this moment. Alas, I am destined to suffer.
3::58::18::While thus brooding over the beautiful Sita, the scion of the Raghus along with Lakshmana hurried towards Janasthana.
3::58::19::Thus blaming his dejected brother, the valiant Rama entered the hermitage, sighing deeply, his face pale and his throat dried up with hunger, exhaustion and thirst. Reaching his dwellingplace, he found it empty. He thoroughly searched the hermitage and the places where she used to move about on the premises. And 'so it has happened', he sadly said to himself, his hair raised on end.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे अष्टपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyeighth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
