3::66::1::Lakshmana, son of Sumitra, consoling the mighty miserable Rama, who was afflicted with sorrow, and was weeping helplessly like an orphan, drowned in great delusion, devoid of consciousness, pressed his feet and addressed him:
3::66::2::O Rama king Dasaratha begot you by doing a great penance and performing great deeds, just as gods begot the nectar.
3::66::3::King Dasaratha, impelled by your virtues, and separation from you attained godhood as heard from Bharata.
3::66::4::O Rama, if you cannot bear this sorrow that has befallen you, how can weak and ordinary persons endure (such suffering)?
3::66::5::O best of men  if you grieve and burn the world with your brilliance, wherefrom will the (ordinary) afflicted people get relief?
3::66::6::It is the go of the world. Yayati, son of Nahusa, shared heaven with Indra but because of his curse (for his bad conduct) suffered misfortune.
3::66::7::To sage Vasistha, our father's priest, were born a hundred sons in a day.But all of them were killed in one day the same way.
3::66::8::You (rigidly) adhere to truth.(Like you) the mother earth who is adored by all the worlds, is unshakeable. Yet she is seen to be shaking at times.
3::66::9::The powerful Sun and Moon, righteous entities, who are the two eyes of these worlds and on whom everything rests firmly, also suffer eclipses sometimes.
3::66::10::O best among men  Fate spares none. Great beings, every creature, even the gods cannot escape fate.
3::66::11::It is I heard that Indra and other deities are also governed by the principle of justice. Therefore, you should not bewail, O tiger among men.
3::66::12::Even if Vaidehi is killed or abducted, you should not grieve like ordinary men, O sinless hero 
3::66::13::O Rama, you always see the truth. So  in the face of great difficulties men like you, whose vision is not blurred, should not lose heart.
3::66::14::O best among men  judge the facts rightly with your intellect. The wise apply their minds and know what is right and what is wrong.
3::66::15::Good results are not expected from the actions of persons who cannot distinguish between their virtues and vices, from those who are unstable in their deeds.
3::66::16::O Rama you yourself in the past have instructed me many times that way. Who can be your adviser in this matter ? You are indeed like Brihaspati.
3::66::17::Even gods cannot fathom your intellect. I am only trying to rouse your wisdom your sorrow has sent to sleep.
3::66::18::O bull among the Ikshvakus, weigh your divine and human prowess before you try to kill your enemies.
3::66::19::O best among men  where is the good in the destruction of all? Know your sinful enemy before you uproot him.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकेय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे षट्षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtysixth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
