3::33::1::ततः then, दीना distressed , शूर्पणखा Surpanakha, सङ्क्रुद्धा  anguished , अमात्यमध्ये in the midst of ministers, लोकरावणम्  who makes the world cry, रावणम् Ravana, परुषम् harsh, वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवीत् spoke.
3::33::2::प्रमत्तः intoxicated, कामभोगेषु  with the pleasures of passion, स्वैरवृत्तः  acting impulsively, निरङ्कुशः ungoaded, बोद्धव्यम्  which ought to be understood, समुत्पन्नम्  arising, घोरम् dreadful, भयम् fear, नावबुध्यसे do not understand.
3::33::3::ग्राम्येषु vulgar, भोगेषु pleasures, सक्तम् addicted to, कामवृत्तम् who acts as he wishes, लुब्धम् greedy, महीपतिम् king, प्रजाः people, श्मशानाग्निमिव like the fire in the crematorium, न बहुमन्यन्ते will not respect.
3::33::4::पार्थिवः king, काले at the right time, कार्याणि actions, नानुतिष्ठति does not execute, राज्येन सह along with kingdom, तैः with them, कार्यैश्च सह along with works, विनश्यति  is destroyed.
3::33::5::अयुक्तचारम् without employment of spies, दुर्दर्शम्  not giving audience (to  people), अस्वाधीनम् not independent, नराधिपम् king, नराः people, द्विपाः elephants, नदीपङ्कामिव like a muddy river, दूरात् from a distance, वर्जयन्ति keep away.
3::33::6::अस्वाधीनाः not independent, ये those, नराधिपाः kings, विषयम् their country, न रक्षन्ति do not protect, ते they, वृद्ध्या by intellect, सागरे in the sea, गिरयः यथा like the mountains, न प्रकाशन्ते do not shine.
3::33::7::त्वम् you, आत्मवद्भि: by the selfrespecting, देवगन्धर्वदानवैः by gods, gandharvas and demons, विगृह्य having made enmity, अयुक्तचारः  not appointed spies, चपलः fickleminded, कथम् how, राजा king, भविष्यसि will you be?
3::33::8::राक्षस O demon, त्वं तु you are, बालस्वभावश्च childish in nature, बुद्धिहीनश्च devoid of any intellect, ज्ञातव्यम् what ought to be known, न जानीषे you do not know, कथं how, राज king, भविष्यसि will you be?
3::33::9::जयताम् of the victorious, वर best, येषाम् of those, नरेन्द्राणाम् of kings, चारश्च spy, कोशश्च treasury, नयश्च judiciary, अस्वाधीनाः not under control, ते those, प्राकृतैः with commoners, जनैः with people, समाः are equals.
3::33::10::नराधिपाः kings, यस्मात् since, दूरस्थान् things at distant places, सर्वान् all, अर्थान् issues, चारेण by spies, पश्यन्ति see, तस्मात् for that, राजानः kings, दीर्घचक्षुषः farsighted, उच्यन्ते are called.
3::33::11::अयुक्तचारम् without employing spies, त्वाम् you, प्राकृतैः ignoramus, सचिवैः ministers, वृतम् surrounding, मन्ये consider, यः who, जनस्थाने at Janasthana, स्वजनम् your relations, हतम् killed, नावबुद्ध्यसे you do not know.
3::33::12::एकेन by one alone, रामेण by Rama, क्रूरकर्मणाम् perpetrators of cruel acts, रक्षसाम् demons, चतुर्दश fourteen, सहस्राणि thousand, हतानि are killed, सहदूषणः and Dusana too, खरश्च Khara also.
3::33::13::अक्लिष्टकर्मणा by effortless performer of formidable tasks, रामेण by Rama, ऋषीणाम् of the ascetics, अभयम् safety, दत्तम् is given, दण्डकाः Dandaka's, कृतक्षेमाश्च peace restored, जनस्थानम् Janasthanam, धर्षितं च is attacked.
3::33::14::रावण O Ravana, त्वं तु you are, लुब्धः  avaricious, प्रमत्तः intoxicated, पराधीनश्च under others control, यः who, स्वे his own, विषये kingdom, (सम्) उत्पन्नम् generated, भयम् fear, नावबुध्यसे not aware of.
3::33::15::तीक्ष्णम् sharp one, अल्पप्रदातारम् not a generous giver, प्रमत्तम् intoxicated, गर्वितम् proud, शठम् fraudulent, पार्थिवम् to the king, व्यसने in calamity, सर्वभूतानि all beings, नाभिधावन्ति not run for protection.
3::33::16::अतिमानिनम् extremely arrogant, अग्राह्यम् one who is not acceptable (to good people), आत्मसम्भावितं नरम् selfconceited, क्रोधिनम् cholorictempered, महीपतिम् king, स्वजनोऽपि his own people also, व्यसने in adversity, हन्ति will murder.
3::33::17::कार्याणि works, नानुतिष्ठति he does not do, भयेषु fear, न बिभेति च not afraid of, क्षिप्रम् surely, राज्यात् from the kingdom, च्युतः toppled down, दीनः wretched, तृणैः with a blade of grass, तुल्यः equal, भविष्यति will be.
3::33::18::शुष्कैः dried up, काष्ठैः logs of wood, लोष्टैरपि even clods of earth, पांसुभिरपि च even with the dust, कार्यम् may have some value, भवेत् will be, तु but, स्थानात् from the throne, परिभ्रष्टैः thrown out, वसुधाधिपै by the kings, कार्यम् work, न स्यात् will not be.
3::33::19::उपभुक्तम् worn and discarded, वासः cloth, यथा as, मृदिताः crushed, स्रजो वा even garlands, यथा as, एवम् in that way, राज्यात् from the kingdom, परिभ्रष्टः fallen, समर्थोऽपि even if he be capable, निरर्थकः worthless.
3::33::20::यः राजा such king, अप्रमत्तः alert, सर्वज्ञः omniscient, विजितेन्द्रियः has control over his senses, कृतज्ञः grateful, धर्मशीलश्च one with moral conduct, सः राजा that king, चिरम् for a long time, तिष्ठते continues to rule.
3::33::21::नयनाभ्याम् with both the eyes, प्रसुप्तोऽपि even when asleep, नयचक्षुषा eye of justice, जागर्ति  who is awake, त्यक्तक्रोधः devoid of anger, अप्रमादश्च attentive man, सः राजा such a king, जनैः by people, पूज्यते is worshipped.
3::33::22::रावण Ravana, दुर्बुद्धि: evilminded, त्वं तु you are, एतैः by these, गुणैः qualities, विवर्जितः you are devoid of, यस्य whose, ते your, रक्षसाम् of demons, सुमहान् very great, वधः destruction, चारैः by spies, अविदितः was not known. 
3::33::23::परावमन्ता accusing others, विषयेषु in pleasures, सङ्गतः addicted, देशकालप्रविभागतत्ववित्  sense of judgement of place and time, गुणदोषनिश्चये discrimination of vice and virtue, अयुक्तबुद्धिः lacks wisdom, विपन्नराज्यः with loss of kingdom, नचिरात् in no time, विपत्स्यसे will destroy yourself.
3::33::24::क्षणदाचरेश्वरः lord of nightwalkers, धनेन by wealth, दर्पेण by arrogance, बलेन च and by strength, अन्वितः heeding, सः रावणः that Ravana, इति thus, तया by her, परिकीर्तितान् mentioned, स्वदोषान् his mistakes, बुद्ध्या by his intellect, समीक्ष्य after reviewing, चिरम् for a long time, विचिन्तयामास started thinking over.
