3::63::1::Prince Rama, separated from his beloved, lost his senses out of sorrow. Seeing his brother in a distressed state, he sank again into intense grief.
3::63::2::Plunged in deep grief, Rama heaved hot sighs and said these words to griefstricken Lakshmanaweeping:
3::63::3::I think there is none on earth like me who has performed such forbidden acts.  One grief after the other is successively piercing my heart and my mind.
3::63::4::In the past I had certainly done some sinful deeds I often liked the consequences of which have descended on me now as I am experiencing one sorrow after another.
3::63::5::O Lakshmana, loss of kingdom, separation from kith and kin, death of father, separation from mother--all these thoughts augment my sorrow faster and in greater measure. 
3::63::6::O Lakshmana, all this sorrow calmed down when I came to this solitary forest. But with Sita's separation, it was rekindled just as fire blazes forth again with logs of wood. 
3::63::7::The timid princess of mine forcibly carried away into the sky by a demon must have again and again cried aloud out of fear in a broken voice.
3::63::8::Her captivating copper coloured skin, smeared with the best of red sandal paste would not be surely pleasing now, drenched in blood and mud.
3::63::9::Her face with her clear, sweet and gentle words and her curly hair falling will no more look bright coming under the grip of demons like the moon eclipsed by Rahu.
3::63::10::The bloodthirsty demons must have drunk the blood of my faithful beloved in a lonely place breaking her neck that used to wear beautiful necklaces.
3::63::11::The lovely, largeeyed lady separated from me in the desolate forest, abducted and dragged by demons must have cried at that time desperately like a female osprey.
3::63::12::On this rock, O Lakshmana, my goodnatured lady with her lovely smile sat with me in the past and chatted with you.
3::63::13::Would she have gone to Godavari, the foremost of the rivers so dear at all times to my beloved ? But I think she has not gone there alone at any time.
3::63::14::The lady whose face was like the lotus, whose large eyes were like lotus petals could  have gone to fetch lotuses (but) that also is not possible as she has never gone there without me.
3::63::15::Could she have gone to the forest where there are many kinds of trees in full bloom inhabited by a variety of birds? That is also not possible as she is timid and too scared to go there alone.
3::63::16::O Sungod, you know all the happenings of the world. You are witness to all the deeds of the people, true and false. Tell me where my beloved Sita has gone or has been carried off. My grief never ceases.
3::63::17::O Windgod, there is nothing that you know not in all the worlds. Do tell me if  that lady of a noble race has been abducted or dead or is on the way.
3::63::18::While Rama was thus in tears, in a state of sorrow and swoon, Lakshmana who was rational and courageous spoke to him words appropriate to the time :
3::63::19::O noble prince, give up grief. Take courage. Show enthusiasm to search and find Sita. Enthusiastic people will not get despondent in carrying out the  most difficult tasks.
3::63::20::Rama who carries on the (glorious) progeny of the Raghu dynasty, did not (however) consider seriously the words of Lakshmana, a man of great prowess. Forsaking his courage he was once again overtaken by deep sorrow.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे त्रिषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtythird sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
