3::38::1::Once I was roaming the earth, like a mountain possessing the  strength of a thousand elephants, like a dark cloud, wearing bright gold earrings and crown,holding a spear in hand, terrorising the people. I was wandering in Dandaka forest feeding on the flesh of ascetics.
3::38::2::Hence the great sage, righteous Visvamitra afraid of me, went to king Dasaratha  and said: 
3::38::3::'O king Maricha has created in me a great fear. Spare the self possessed Rama to protect me while I do the sacrifice.'
3::38::4::When the great, venerable sage Visvamitra said so, the righteous king Dasaratha replied:
3::38::5::'My son Rama is only twelve. He is not experienced in the use of weapons. I shall accompany you with my army.
3::38::6::'O distinguished sage with the four divisions of my army I will slay the enemies you want me to.'
3::38::7::When  the king thus responded to the sage,  he told him that none other than Rama in this world is a match for that demon.
3::38::8::'O king, you have protected even gods in wars and have been a guardian. Your deeds are very wellknown in the three worlds.
3::38::9::'O scourge of foes as you wish, let your great army wait here. Even though Rama is young he is glorious, and capable of subduing the enemy. I will take him. Be blessed.'
3::38::10::Sage Visvamitra saying so took the son of the king and went back very happily to his hermitage.
3::38::11::Then Rama was initiated for the protection of sacrifices and stood on guard, stretching his wonderful bow.
3::38::12::Thereafter, handsome Rama, with eyes like lotus petals, beards ungrown, clad in a single garment with knotted hair on the head, wielding a bow, with a chain of gold, luminous with his own lustre enhanced the glory of Dandaka forest by looking like the young moon just risen.
3::38::13::Then looking like a dark cloud, wearing bright golden earrings, proud of power bestowed on me with boons, I arrived at the hermitage.
3::38::14::I entered at once and lifted my weapons. Rama saw me and unperturbed, started stringing his bow.
3::38::15::Out of my delusion I underestimated the young boy, and screaming, ran towards Visvamitra's sacrificial altar.
3::38::16::Then Rama released a sharp arrow that could kill the enemy. It struck me and threw me at a distance of hundred yojanas into the sea.
3::38::17::O dear being thrown away by the speed of his dart I lost my consciousness. I was protected by Rama who did not want to kill me. 
3::38::18::O dear I was thrown into the deep sea and after a long time regained consciousness and  returned to the city of Lanka.
3::38::19::That way I was spared by the young boy who was not versed in archery and who could still accomplish the task with ease.Those who accompanied me were destroyed.
3::38::20::If you pick up conflict with Rama even while being warned by me you will soon face a dreadful calamity.
3::38::21::You will bring grief and disaster into the lives of demons who are sporting in love and who are in the habit of celebrating community festivals with joy.
3::38::22::You will see the city of Lanka dotted with magnificent royal mansions embellished  with different kinds of gems ruined for the sake of Sita.
3::38::23::Even without committing any sin those pure souls because they keep company with sinners will be destroyed for the sins of others just like fishes in a pool of serpents.
3::38::24::You will see the demons who smear their limbs with sandal paste and unguents, who are adorned with excellent ornaments slain and laid on the ground for your mistakes.
3::38::25::You will see the rest of the demons with their wives gone or fleeing in all directions helplessly with none to take care of them.
3::38::26::You will undoubtedly see Lanka filled with arrows, surrounded by flames of fire and its buildings on fire.
3::38::27::O king there is no sin greater than violating the chastity of others wives, when you have married a thousand lovely women.
3::38::28::Enjoy with your wives. Protect your race, prestige, kingdom, prosperity and your own dear life.
3::38::29::If you wish to enjoy your beautiful wives and your good friends for long, do not create enmity with Rama.
3::38::30::If you violate Sita forcibly notwithstanding my friendly warning, your life will be drained by the arrows of Rama and you will reach the abode of Yama with your kith and kin, your strength depleted.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे अष्टत्रिंशस्सर्गः।Thus ends the thirtyeighth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
