3::2::1::अथ then, कृतातिथ्यः on receiving hospitality, सः रामस्तु that Rama also, सूर्यस्योदयनं प्रति at the time of sunrise, सर्वान् all, मुनीन् sages, आम्नत्ऱ्य  took leave, वनमेव into the forest, अन्वगाहत entered deep.
3::2::2::लक्ष्मणानुगतः followed by Lakshmana, रामः Rama, नानामृगगणाकीर्णम् filled with different kinds of animals, ऋक्षशार्दूलसेवितम् inhabited by bears and tigers, ध्वस्तवृक्षलतागुल्मम् a place where trees, creepers and bushes were crushed (due to frequent visit by demons), दुर्दश difficult to see, सलिलाशयम् waterreservoirs like wells, निष्कूजनानाशकुनि with the twitter of various birds, झिल्लिकागणनादितम् resounding with the chirping of crickets. वनमध्यम् midst of the forest, ददर्श ह witnessed.
3::2::3::सीतया सह along with Sita, काकुत्स्थः Rama of the Kakutstha family, घोरमृगायुते infested with dreadful animals, तस्मिन् in that place, गिरिशृङ्गाभम् comparable to the peak of a mountain, महास्वनम्  heavy sound, पुरुषादम् a cannibal, ददर्श saw.
3::2::4::गम्भीराक्षम् deepeyed, महावक्त्रम् with a large face, विकटम् of dreadful appearance, विषमोदरम् with a huge belly, बीभत्सम् loathsome, विषमम् crude, दीर्घम् tall, विकृतम् ugly, घोरदर्शनम् of frightful appearance.
3::2::5::वैयाघ्रम् tiger's, चर्म skin, वसानम्  wore, वसार्द्रम्  wet with marrow, रुधिरोक्षितम् drenched with  blood, सर्वभूतानाम् of all beings, त्रासनम् causing terror, व्यादितास्यम् with wide open mouth, अन्तकम् इव like the god of death.
3::2::6::त्रीन् three, सिंहान् lions, चतुरः four, व्याघ्रान् tigers, द्वौ two, वृकौ wolves, दश ten, पृषतान् deer, सविषाणम् along with the tusk of an elephant, वसादिग्धम् wet with the fat of flesh, महत् great, गजस्य शिरः elephant's head, आयसे on an iron, शूले spoke, अवसज्य having pierced, महास्वनम् shouting loudly, विनदन्तम् while he  produced.
3::2::7::सः that, रामम् Rama, लक्ष्मणं च and Lakshmana, मैथिलीम् princess of Mithila, सीतां च and to Sita, दृष्ट्वा seeing सुसङ्कृद्धः he was with anger, अन्तकः god of death, कालः Yama, प्रजाः इव like the people, अभ्यधावत् ran towards.
3::2::8::ततः then, सः that demon, मेदिनीम् earth, चालयन्निव as if shaking, भैरवम् dreadful, नादम् sound, कृत्वा after producing, वैदेहीम् Sita, अङ्केन in his lap, आदाय taking, अपक्रम्य after moving aside, अब्रवीत् said.
3::2::9::जटाचीरधरौ both of you clad in bark and with matted hair, क्षीणजीवितौ both with shortened life, युवाम् both of you, सभार्यौ with your wife, शरचापासिधारिणौ holding bows, arrows and swords, दण्डकारण्यम् to Dandaka forest, प्रविष्टौ  entered into.
3::2::10::तापसयोः you wear attire of ascetics, वाम् you both, वासः stay, कथम् how is it possible, अधर्मचरिणौ both unrighteous people, मुनिदूषकौ both distorting ascetic discipline, पापौ sinners, युवाम् both , कौ who are you?
3::2::11::अहम् I, विराधो नाम Viradha by name, राक्षसः demon, सायुधः ready with arms, नित्यम् always, ऋषिमांसानि flesh of ascetics, भक्षयन् while eating, दुर्गम्  dense, इदम् here, वनम् forest, चरामि I wander.
3::2::12::वरारोहा a beautiful woman (with fine hips), इयं नारी this woman, मम my, भार्या wife, भविष्यति will be, अहम् I, मृधे in the fight, पापयोः of both of you sinners, युवयोः of you both, रुधिरम् blood, पास्यामि I shall drink.
3::2::13::एवम् in that way, ब्रुवतः while he spoke, दुरात्मनः of that wicked, तस्य विराधस्य that Viradha's, सगर्वितम् boastful, जनकात्मजा daughter of Janaka, दुष्टम् cruel, वाक्यम् statements, श्रुत्वा after hearing, सम्भ्रान्ता  bewildered out of fear.
3::2::14::सीता Sita, उद्वेगात् due to anxiety, प्रवाते in strong wind, कदली यथा like a plantain tree, प्रवेपिता was shaken, राघवः Rama, विराधाङ्कगताम् in the lap of Viradha, शुभाम् Sita, the auspicious, ताम् her, दृष्ट्वा on seeing, परिशुष्यता with a parched(pale), मुखेन with face, लक्ष्मणम् to Lakshmana, वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
3::2::15::सौम्य O gentle one, नरेन्द्रस्य king's, जनकस्य Janaka's, आत्मसम्भवाम् daughter, born of his own self, मम भार्याम् my wife, शुभाचाराम् of good conduct, अत्यन्तसुखसंवृद्धाम् brought up in utmost comfort, यशस्विनीम् an illustrious one, विराधाङ्के  in the lap of Viradha, प्रवेशिताम् entered, राजपुत्रीम्  princess, पश्य  see.
3::2::16::लक्ष्मण O Lakshmana, अस्मासु for us, यत् whatever, अभिप्रेतम् desired, यत् that, वरवृतं च  those boons desired, कैकेय्याः by Kaikeyi's, प्रियम् joy, अद्यैव to day itself, क्षिप्रम् now itself, सुसंवृतम् attained well.
3::2::17::दीर्घदर्शिनी farsighted lady, या such a lady as she is, पुत्रार्थे for her son, राज्येन with kingdom, न तुष्यति not being contended, यया by whomsoever, सर्वभूतानाम् of all beings, प्रियः dear, अहम् I, वनम् forest, प्रस्थापितः is sent, या whoever, मम my, मध्यमा माता middle mother, सा she, अद्य today, सकामा has her desire fulfilled.
3::2::18::सौमित्रे O Lakshmana, वैदेह्याः Sita's, परस्पर्शात् the touch of a man other man, पितुः father's, विनाशात् more than demise, तथा in the same way, स्वराज्यहरणात् more than the the loss of my kingdom, मे to me, दुःखतरम् more painful, नास्ति is not. 
3::2::19::काकुत्स्थे when Rama of the Kakutstha family, इति this way, ब्रुवति while he spoke, लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, बाष्पशोकपरिप्लुते full of tears of sorrow, क्रुद्धः angry, रुद्धः tied up, नागः इव like a serpent, श्वसन् hissing, अब्रवीत् said.
3::2::20::काकुत्स्थ O Rama, भूतानाम् of all beings, नाथः lord, वासवोपमः comparable to Indra, त्वम् you, अनाथः an orphan, इव like, प्रेष्येण by a servant (at your service), मया by myself, किमर्थम् for what reason, परितप्यसे feeling sad.
3::2::21::क्रुद्धेन by an angry one, मया by me, अद्य now, शरेण by the arrow, निहतस्य killed, गतासोः of one who loses life, रक्षसः of this demon, विराधस्य Viradha's, शोणितम् blood, मही the earth, पास्यति will drink.
3::2::22::राज्यकामे  one who was desirous of kingdom, भरते on Bharata, मम my, यः whatever, क्रोध: anger, बभूव ह was felt, तम् that, वज्री Indra, वज्रम् thunderbolt, अचले इव at a mountain, विराधे on Viradha, प्रमोक्ष्यामि I will release.
3::2::23::मम my, भुजबलवेगवेगितः by the strength of my arms, महान् great, शरः arrow, अस्य his, महोरसि in high speed, पततु may fall, तनोः from the body, जीवितम् life, व्यपनयतु separate, ततः then, विघूर्णितः  reeling round and round, महीम् earth, पततु may fall down.
