3::30::1::Rama, fond of dharma, broke into pieces Khara's mace with his arrows, and smiling at bewildered Khara, said:
3::30::2:: O lowly demon, you have already exhibited all your strength. Inferior to me in energy, you are needlessly roaring.
3::30::3::The mace about which you boasted so much has betrayed your confidence. Shattered by my arrows it now lies on the ground.
3::30::4::You said you will wipe the tears of the dead demons. (Now) those words have proved false.
3::30::5::You are mean. You have false pride. You are of low behaviour. I shall take away your life, O demon,, Just as Garuda carried off the nectar.
3::30::6::Now with your throat split open by my arrows , the earth will drink your foamy blood full of bubbles.
3::30::7::With all your limbs covered with dust, both the arms dropped down and stretched  out  on the ground, you will sleep as though hugging the earth, like embracing a rare woman.
3::30::8::When you, O vile demon, will go into eternal sleep the Dandaka grounds will provide shelter to those who deserve it here.
3::30::9::O demon, when my arrows destroy your hold over Janasthana the sages will move freely without fear all over this forest.
3::30::10::Having lost all their relations, the demonesses, who were causing fear to others,will move away with faces full of tears. 
3::30::11::Your wives, who have got a husband like you, must have been born to a befitting race. They will taste the pangs of sorrow today, for no reasons whatsoever.
3::30::12::O cruel, mean, vile fellow, you had been always opposing the brahmins who pour oblations in fire under fear.
3::30::13::When Rama was thus speaking in a state of excitement in the middle of war, the choleric Khara  started abusing him in a harsher tone.
3::30::14::You are very haughty. When there is every cause of fear you pretend fearlessness. Being in the grip of death you do not know what to speak and what not to speak.
3::30::15::Those bound by the noose of death, do not know what to and what not to do, as their six senses cease to function.
3::30::16::Having said thus to Rama with a frown on his face, Khara, looking around for something to strike him with, saw a huge sal tree not very far. 
3::30::17::Khara, biting his lower lip, uprooted the tree , lifted it with his mighty arms, and shouting at Rama loudly hurled it at him, saying, 'You are dead'.
3::30::18::Brave Rama shattered with a flood of arrows the tree falling over him and summoned sharp anger to end Khara in war.
3::30::19::Full of sweat and with the corners of his eyes turned red, Rama hit Khara with a thousand arrows in the encounter.
3::30::20::With his body pierced with arrows his blood started flowing like the waterfalls flow from mount Prasravana.
3::30::21:: Completely struck by Rama's arrows, Khara, intoxicated with the smell of  blood, ran speedily charging towards Rama.
3::30::22::Rama who was an adept in the science of arms picked up his valour quickly and moved a step back (not  to give him an opportunity to strike), looking at the highly agitated Khara falling upon him, with his body fully drenched in blood.
3::30::23::Rama took a dart glowing like fire which resembled another Brahmadanda to kill Khara in the war.
3::30::24::Righteous Rama placed on his bow the dart given him by wise Indra, king of the gods, and shot it at Khara.
3::30::25::Bending the bow fully, Rama released the arrow roaring like a violent gust of wind, which fell on Khara's chest.
3::30::26::Just as Yama was burnt by Rudra's fire(from his eyes) in Swetaranya, Khara collapsed on the ground consumed by the fire of Rama's arrow.
3::30::27::Khara fell down just like Vrutra or Bala killed by Indra's thunderbolt or like Numuchi by the froth of the sea.
3::30::28::Then the rajarsis, great seers gathered together, offered their worship to Rama  and said these words joyfully :
3::30::29::For this purpose, killer of Paka, the gIorious Indra (who can break a fortress), came to the hermitage of Sarabhanga.
3::30::30::You are brought to this place by the great sages who had cleverly devised a plan to kill the cruel sinners, these demons৷৷
3::30::31::O son of Dasaratha, you have accomplished such a task that hereafter the sages in Dandaka will discharge their rightful duties happily. 
3::30::32::Meanwhile the wonderstruck gods along with the charanas (celestial bards) got together and began beating the drums and raining showers of flowers on Rama from all sides.
3::30::33::'In a little more than half a moment of this great war Rama had accomplished the terrific task of killing with sharp darts fourteen thousand demons, led by Khara and Dusana.
3::30::34::'Rama who knows the self has performed a great work. Oh what prowess what efficiency  only lord Visnu could do this'. So saying all the gods went back to their respective destinations.
3::30::35::In the mean time, heroic Lakshmana accompanied by Sita came out of the mountain cave happily and entered the hermitage.
3::30::36::Then victorious Rama having been worshipped by the seers and also by Lakshmana entered the hermitage.
3::30::37::On seeing Rama killing the enemies of the great sages for their happiness Sita felt glad and embraced her husband.
3::30::38::Sita, daughter of Janaka, was happy to see the demons killed by Rama who himself was unhurt.
3::30::39::Then the daughter of Janaka, cheerful Sita, who had a face bright like the moon, embraced Rama, destroyer of demons who was worshipped by the delighted sages. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtieth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
