3::32::1::Seeing Dusana, Khara and also Trisira along with the fourteen thousand demon warriors of terrific performance killed by Rama, singlehanded, Surpanakha roared     like a cloud.
3::32::2::Seeing the performance of Rama which is very difficult for others, Surpanakha got scared and went to Lanka, ruled by Ravana.
3::32::3::Surpanakha saw Ravana shining brilliantly, seated like Indra along with ministers and Maruts on top of the aerial chariot. 
3::32::4::Ravana, sitting on the magnificent golden seat on a golden altar looked radiant like the Sun or the blazing fire.
3::32::5::Invincible to gods, gandharvas, all living beings, great sages and seers, he was like Yama, lord of death with wide open jaws.
3::32::6::He had scars of wounds caused by the thunderbolt received in war between gods and demons, and marks of scars on his chest made by tips of the the tusks of elephant Airavata.
3::32::7::Valiant Ravana had an attractive appearance with beautiful dresses twenty arms,ten heads, a broad chest  and brilliant royal marks. 
3::32::8::Wearing burnished golden earrings, he looked bright like the glittering vaidurya. And with his wellformed arms, white teeth and  wide mouth, he looked like a mountain.
3::32::9::He was hit by the wheel of Visnu for hundreds of times during great wars and beaten by other weapons.
3::32::10:: Ravana whose body was not hurt by the weapons in war with gods, who could perturb even the imperturbable seas, was quick  in action.
3::32::11::(He was) one who could lift and throw great mountains, torment even gods, violate  dharma at the root, and cast an evil eye on the wives of others.
3::32::12::He who could employ all divine weapons, disrupt sacrifices, had gone to the city of Bhogavati, defeated Vasuki and abducted the dear wife of Takshaka.
3::32::13:: Ravana went to mount Kailasa, conquered Kubera and took away forcibly his aerial chariot Pushpaka which can fly as per the rider's desire
3::32::14::Out of anger he destroyed all the gardens of gods like Chitraratha of Kubera full of lotusponds and Nandana, the pleasuregarden of Indra.
3::32::15::He was like the peak of a mountain. He could stop with his arms the great Moon and Sun from rising. He was a scorcher of enemies.
3::32::16::This steadfast Ravana who had in the past performed penance for ten thousand years in a dense forest offered his heads to the selfborn Brahma.
3::32::17::He was unafraid of death in the hands of gods or demons or gandharvas or pisachas or birds or snakes in war except humans.
3::32::18::The mighty Ravana  defiled the sacred Soma juice, worthy of oblations, extracted by Brahmins by chanting mantras in scrifices.
3::32::19::He disrupted sacrifices at the final stage. He killed brahmins. He was ruthless, harsh, and  merciless. He was involved in activities against human welfare.
3::32::20::That demoness , Surpanakha saw  her very strong,valiant brother Ravana who made all beings cry and created fear in all worlds
3::32::21::Resplendently attired, adorned with jewels, wearing beautiful gardlands, seated on a raised throne, he(Ravana) was like death to even the lord of death
3::32::22::On reaching Ravana, the lord of demons, the delight of the Paulastya dynasty, and the destroyer of enemies surrounded by ministers, the terrified, Surpanakha said these words:
3::32::23::Showing her body disfigured by great Lakshmana, Surpanakha, the fearless wanderer, overwhelmed with fear said these cruel words  to Ravana sitting with large, glittering eyes:इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे द्वात्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtysecond sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
