3::60::1::As  Rama was returning( to the hermitage), his left eye throbbed repeatedly  and he stumbled and his body trembled.
3::60::2::As inauspicious omens appeared again and again, doubting if all is well with Sita, he said to himself, Can Sita be safe?
3::60::3::Anxious to see Sita, he hastened to the hermitage and finding it empty, became restless.
3::60::4::Rama, the delight of the Raghu dynasty, hurtled in, turning round, throwing his hands to and fro, casting his looks all around the cottage where she used to move. The cottage, devoid of Sita looked like a lotuspond, the beauty of its lotuses destroyed by winter.
3::60::5::The trees with flowers withered, the animals and birds turned pale looked as if they were weeping. Bereft of their beauty they wore a ruinous look. The sylvan deities had left.  The deerskin and kusa grass were strewn here and there, the grass cushions and straw mats lay scattered. Seeing his cottage so desolate Rama wept again and again.
3::60::6::'Timid Sita might have been abducted or dead or crushed or eaten up by demons. Or, she may be hiding for protection in the forest'
3::60::7::'Maybe she has gone to pluck flowers or fruits. Or to the lotuspond or river to  fetch water.'
3::60::8::He ransacked the forest, yet did not find his beloved. He  appeared like a mad man, his eyes turned red with tears of sorrow.
3::60::9::Running from tree to tree, hill to hill, and river to river and weeping, Rama was immersed in a sea of sorrow.
3::60::10::O Kadamba tree, tell me if you have seen my beloved with a fair face and with love for kadamba flowers.
3::60::11::O Bilva tree, tell me if you have seen a lady delicate like your tender leaf, dressed in yellow silk, a lady whose breasts are round like Bilva fruits.
3::60::12::O Arjuna tree, tell me if you know a timid lady, daughter of Janaka and my beloved, fond of Arjuna tree. Is the living or not ?
3::60::13::This Kakubha tree rich with tender leaves and flowers (perhaps)knows Maithili whose thighs are beautiful like the trunk of the Kakubha tree.
3::60::14::This great Tilaka tree round which bees bumble surely knows the lady who loves to put tilaka marks on the forehead.
3::60::15::O Ashoka tree, dispeller of sorrow, by quickly showing me my darling make me ashoka (free from sorrow) as I am griefstricken at heart.
3::60::16::O Palmyra tree be kind to me and tell me if you have seen my beautiful beloved who has breasts like ripe palmyra fruit? 
3::60::17::O Jambu tree, do not hesitate to tell me if you know Sita whose body shines lovely like gold.
3::60::18::O Karnikara tree with flowers in full bloom, tell me if you have seen my faithful beloved who is fond of karnikara flowers.
3::60::19::Renowned Rama, like a madman confused, approached the Mango, Kadamba , Sal and Jackfruit, Dhava, Champak, Ketaki trees and Pomegranate, Jasmine and Madhavi creepers, in order to make similar queries.
3::60::20::Or,  O deer do you know about Maithili who has the eyes of a fawn? My beloved who has the restless eyes of a doe may be found in their company.
3::60::21::O elephant tell me if you have seen her whose thighs are like the trunk of an elephant. O best of elephants, tell me if you know her.
3::60::22::O tiger tell me freely and fearlessly if you have seen my beloved princess from Mithila with a face like the moon.
3::60::23::O lotus eyed darling, why are you running away? I have already seen you.  Why are you hiding behind trees and not replying to me?
3::60::24::O my beautiful beloved, stay, stay  Have you no compassion for me ? You are so fond of fun. Why do you avoid me?
3::60::25::O lady of lovely complexion, I can see your yellow silk (flying), while you are running away. If you have love for me, stay on.
3::60::26::O lady with a sweet smile I have never hurt you. When I am in difficulty it does not behove you to ignore me.
3::60::27::It is clear that separated from me, the body of my young beloved is torn off and eaten away by carnivorous demons.
3::60::28::Her beautiful face with her sparkling teeth and lips, wellshaped nose, shining earrings has been like the full moon, eclipsed and rendered pale.
3::60::29::That delicate, beautiful neck of my beloved having the complexion of a champak flower and adorned with necklaces was perhaps eaten up.
3::60::30::Her arms, delicate like tender leaves, their tips (fingers) quivering, adorned with armlets and bracelets have surely been eaten away.
3::60::31::The young lady having many relations, forsaken by me, has been (perhaps) picked up by a demon for food and later abandoned halfeaten.
3::60::32:: O longarmed Lakshmana, are you able to see my beloved anywhere? O noble lady, O darling, where have you gone? O Sita  SIta  
3::60::33::Rama ran from forest to forest, now jumping, now taking strong strides, but all the time weeping, a madman busy in search of his beloved.
3::60::34::He rushed through forests, rivers, hills and mountain streams and through dense jungles with an unstable mind.
3::60::35::Rama went about the vast forest searching for the princess from Mithila all over not giving up hope of finding her. He continued to make great efforts for searching his beloved.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtieth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
