3::60::1::आव्रजमानस्य Rama was moving about, तस्य his, वामलोचनम् left eye, अधः underneath, भृशम् excessively, प्रास्फुरत् throbbed, रामः Rama, प्रास्खलच्च stumbled, अस्य his, वेपथुश्च shivering, जायत was produced.
3::60::2::सः he, अशुभानि inauspicious, निमित्तानि omens, उपालक्ष्य  having marked, सीतायाः of Sita, क्षेमम् अपि नु doubting the welfare, मुहुर्मुहुः again and again, व्याजहार च said also.
3::60::3::अथ then, त्वरमाणः hastening , सीता दर्शनलालसः eager to see, जगाम went, शून्यम् empty, आवसथम् hermitage, दृष्ट्वा saw, उद्विग्नमानसः with an anxious mind, बभूव became.
3::60::4::रघुनन्दनः delight of the Raghu race, वेगेन quickly, उद्भ्रमन्निव turning round and round, विक्षिपन्  throwing his hands, तत्र तत्र  here and there, उटजस्थानम् place of hermitage, समन्ततः all round, अभिवीक्ष्य scaninng, तदा then, सीतया by Sita, रहिताम् devoid of, हेमन्ते in winter season, ध्वस्ताम् destroyed, पद्मिनीमिव like the lotus pond, श्रिया with beauty, विरहिताम् without, पर्णशालाम् cottage, ददर्श saw.
3::60::5::वृक्षैः by the trees, रुदन्तमिव as if crying, म्लानपुष्पमृगद्विजम्  flowers withered and animals and birds turned pale, श्रिया the beauty, विहीनम् devoid of, विध्वस्तम् destroyed, संत्यक्तवनदेवतम् sylvan deities left, विप्रकीर्णाजिनकुशम् with deerskin and kusa grass scattered, विप्रविद्धब्रुसीकटम् with grass cushions and straw mat thrown pellmell, शून्यम् desolate, निजस्थानम् own place, दृष्ट्वा seeing, पुनः पुनः again and again, विललाप wept.
3::60::6::भिरुः timid, हृता abducted, मृता वा or dead, नष्टा वा or ruined, भक्षिता वा or eaten up, भविष्यति may be, अथवा or else, निलीना hiding, अथवा or else, वनम् forest, आश्रिता taken shelter, 
3::60::7::अपिवा or else, पुष्पाणि flowers, फलानि च and fruits, विचेतुम् to pluck, गता gone, अथवा or may be, पद्मिनीम् to a lotus pond, याता to get, जलार्थम्  to get water, नदीम् river, गता gone.
3::60::8::यत्नात् by effort, मृगयमाणः तु while searching, वने in the forest, प्रियाम् darling, नाससाद could not see, शोकरक्तेक्षणः eyes turned red with tears, शोकात् owing to grief, उन्मत्त इव like a mad person, लक्ष्यते he appeared. 
3::60::9::रामः Rama, वृक्षात् from tree, वृक्षम् to another tree, गिरेः mountain, अद्रिम् to another mountain, नदात् from one river, नदीम् to another river, प्रधावन् while running, विलपन्  while weeping, शोकार्णवपरिप्लुतः immersed in a sea of sorrow, बभूव remained.
3::60::10::कदम्ब O Kadamba, कदम्बप्रिया O lover of kadamba flowers, प्रिया my beloved, सा she, काचित् some lady, त्वया by you, अपि दृष्टा is seen, जानीषे यदि if you know, शुभाननाम्  fair face, सीताम् Sita, शंस tell.
3::60::11::बिल्व O Bilva, स्निग्धपल्लवसङ्काशा lovely like tender leaf, पीतकौशेयवासिनी dressed in yellow silk, बिल्वोपमस्तनी lady whose breasts are round (like Bilva fruit), यदि वा दृष्टा if you have seen her, शंसस्व let me know.
3::60::12::अथवा or else, अर्जुन O Arjuna tree, त्वम् you, अर्जुनप्रियाम् lover of Arjuna tree, तां प्रियाम् that beloved of mine, शंस tell me if you know, भीरुः a timid lady, जनकस्य सुता daughter of Janaka, यदि जीवति वा is she living, न वा or not.
3::60::13::वनस्पतिः the tree, पल्लवपुष्पाढ्यः rich with tender leaves and flowers, यथा as, भाति appears, ककुभः kakubha, ककुभोरूम् lady with beautiful thighs, ताम् her, मैथिलीम् Maithili's, व्यक्तम् clearly, जानाति the tree knows.
3::60::14::द्रुमवरः best of trees, अयम् this, तिलकः Tilaka, यथा as, भ्रमरैः with bees, उपगीतः is sung, एषः he that, तिलकप्रियाम् a lover of mark on the forehead, व्यक्तम् it is sure, विजानाति knows?
3::60::15::शोकापनुद O dispeller of sorrow, अशोक O Ashoka tree, प्रियासन्दर्शनेन by showing me my darling, शोकोपहतचेतसम् with a griefstricken heart , माम् to me, क्षिप्रम् quickly, त्वन्नामानम् let me be called by your name, कुरु do it.
3::60::16::ताल Palmyra tree, पक्वतालफलस्तनी one who has breasts like ripened palmyra fruit, त्वया by you, दृष्टा यदि if seen, ते you, मयि my, कारुण्यं यदि kind to me, वरारोहाम् Sita, कथयस्व tell me.
3::60::17::जम्बु O Jambu tree, त्वया by you, सीता Sita, यदि दृष्टा if seen, जम्बूफलोपमा a lady whose body is shining lovely like gold, प्रियाम् the beloved one, (वि)जानीषे यदि know of her, मे to me, निःशङ्कम् without hesitation, कथयस्व tell me.
3::60::18::कर्णिकाराः O Karnikara tree, त्वम् you, अद्य now, सुपुष्पैः with flowers in full doom, भृशम् शोभसे shine, अहो Oh, कर्णिकारप्रिया lover of Karnikara, साध्वी chaste woman, प्रिया beloved, दृष्टा यदि seen her, शंस tell.
3::60::19::महायशाः renowned, रामः Rama, वने forest, चूतनीपमहासालान् big trees like mango, kadamba and sal, पनसान् jackfruit tree, धवान् dhaba tree, दाडिमान् Pomegranate tree, अपि also,तान् them, मल्लिकाः jasmines, माधवीश्चैव Madhavi creepers, चम्पकान् champaks, तथा similarly, केतकीः Ketaki, दृष्ट्वा seeing, गत्वा going near, पृच्छन्  enquired, भ्रान्तः wandering in confusion, उन्मत्तः इव like a madman, लक्ष्यते looked.
3::60::20::अथवा or, मृग O deer, मृगशाबाक्षीम् doe like eyes, मैथिलीम् Maithili, जानासि known, मृगविप्रेक्षणी  whose eyes  look like eyes of young deer, कान्ता beloved, मृगीभिः among the female deer, सहिता with, भवेत् may be.
3::60::21::गज O elephant, गजनासोरूः whose thighs are like the trunk of an elephant, सा she, त्वया by you, दृष्टा is seen, यदि भवेत् if she be, ताम् her, तुभ्यम् to you, विदिताम् known, मन्ये I think, वरवारण O best of elephants, आख्याहि tell me.
3::60::22::शार्दूल tiger, चन्द्रनिभानना lady with a Moon like face, प्रिया dear, सा मैथिली that Mythili, दृष्टा यदि if at all seen by you, विस्रब्धम् with confidence, मम to me, कथयस्व tell me, ते to you, भयम् fear, न not.
3::60::23::कमलेक्षणे O lotuseyed, प्रिये dear, दूरे to a distance, किम् why, धावसि you are running, दृष्टा seen, असि you, आत्मानम् yourself, वृक्षैः with trees, आच्छाद्य covering, माम् me, किम् why, न प्रतिभाषसे not replying.
3::60::24::वरारोहे O beautiful lady, तिष्ठ तिष्ठ stay, stay, ते to you, मयि in me, करुणा compassion, नास्ति is not there, अत्यर्थम् very much, हास्यशीला lady fond of making fun, नासि you are not, माम् me, किमर्थम् why, उपेक्षसे do you avoid me.
3::60::25::वरवर्णिनि O lady of lovely complexion, पीतकौशेयकेन by your yellow silk, सूचिता  indicated, असि you are, धावन्त्यपि even while you are running away, मया by me, दृष्टा you are seen, सौहृदम् love for me, अस्ति यदि if you have, तिष्ठ stay.
3::60::26::अथवा even so, सा she, नैव never, चारुहासिनी lady with sweet smile, हिंसिता hurt, नूनम् surely, यथा as such, कृच्छ्रप्राप्तम् when in difficulties, माम् me, उपेक्षितुम् to ignore, नार्हति should not, नूनम् surely.
3::60::27::मया by me, विरहिता separated, प्रिया my beloved, सा बाला that young lady, व्यक्तम् it is clear, सर्वाणि all, अङ्गानि limbs, विभज्य tearing, पिशिताशनैः by flesheaters, राक्षसैः by demons  भक्षिता is eaten away.
3::60::28::नूनम् surely, शुभदन्तोष्ठम् having beautiful teeth and lips, सुनासम् having beautiful nose, चारुकुण्डलम् shining earrings, पूर्णचन्द्रनिभम् full Moon like, तत् that, मुखम् face, ग्रस्तम् eclipsed, निष्प्रभताम् dull, गतम् is rendered.
3::60::29::विलपन्त्याः wept, कान्तायाः  dear wife, चम्पकवर्णाभा like the colour of champak flowers, ग्रैवेयशोभिता adorned with necklaces and other golden chains, कोमला a delicate, शुभा auspicious, सा ग्रीवा of lovely neck, भक्षिता was eaten. 
3::60::30::विक्षिप्यमाणौ  thrown, पल्लवकोमलौ tender like leaves, वेपमानाग्रौ with trembling tips, सहस्ताभरणाङ्गदौ shining with armlets, bracelets, तौ बाहू those two arms, नूनम् surely, भक्षितौ eaten away. 
3::60::31::बाला young lady, रक्षसाम् of the demons, भक्षणाय वै for eating by, मया by me, विरहिता  separated, बहुबान्धवा having many relations, सार्धेन when half of it is left, परित्यक्ता इव as if abandoned, भक्षिता eaten.
3::60::32::महाबाहो O longarmed one, हाः लक्ष्मण 'Alas Lakshmana ', त्वम् you, क्वचित् in any place, प्रियाम् dear, पश्यसि are you able to see, भद्रे  'O noble lady', हा प्रिये 'O darling', क्व where, गता you are gone, हा सीते O Sita', इति  thus, पुनः again, पुनः again.
3::60::33::रामः Rama, इत्येवम् in that manner, विलपन्  weeping, वनात् from one forest, वनम् to the other forest, परिधावन्  running, क्वचित् at some place, वेगात् with speed, उद्भ्रमते jumped, क्वचित् at some place, बलात् with his strength, विभ्रमते moves fast, क्वचित्  at some place, कान्तान्वेषणतत्परः busy in search of his beloved, मत्तः इव like a madman, आभाति was seen.
3::60::34::सः he, वनानि the forests, नदी: rivers, शैलान् hills, गिरिप्रस्रवणानि च streams of mountains, काननानि च dense forests, अपरिसंस्थितः not stable, वेगेन rushed, भ्रमति he wandered.
3::60::35::सः Rama, विपुलम् vast, महत् great, वनम् forest, तथा in that way, गत्वा after going, सर्वम् all, परीत्य searching, मैथिलीं प्रति pertaining to Maithili, अनिष्ठिताशः giving up hope of finding her, सः Rama, पुनः again, प्रियायाः his beloved's, मार्गणे in search, परमम् supreme, परिश्रमम् effort, चकार made.
