3::41::1::At this royal command which was against his interest Maracha used harsh words to the demonking:
3::41::2::Who is that sinner who has given you this advice which will spell destruction on you, your sons, your kingdom and your ministers ?
3::41::3::Which sinner is not able to see you happy? O king by whom is this gate of death shown to you cunningly?
3::41::4::This is clear that your enemy demons are now powerless. Hence they want you to be engaged with a stronger power and be destroyed.
3::41::5::O Ravana by which mean fellow is this advice given against your welfare? Who wants you to be destroyed by your own action.
3::41::6::O Ravana the ministers should have prevented you by all means from adopting this  wrong path. Since they have not done so, they deserve to be spain.
3::41::7::Good ministrers should always prevent a lustful king from taking resourse to an evil path. Why were you not stopped, even though you deserve to be checked.
3::41::8::O Ravana  the best among the successful ministers attain piety, prosperity, pleasures and fame by the grace of the king.
3::41::9::Otherwise evrything will become useless, O Ravana  Others will suffer calamities on account of their master's vices.
3::41::10::O Ravana, the best among the victorious indeed the king is at the root of righteousness and victory.Therefore, the king should be protected by all at every stage. 
3::41::11::O nightwalking demon  a kingdom cannnot be governed by a king who is rude or hostile or impolite.
3::41::12::Ministers who adopt improper strategies go down along with the king just like swift horses driven by a slow charioteer on a rugged terrain.
3::41::13::Persons who walk the righteous path go down in this world along with their kith and kin due to the mistakes committed by others .
3::41::14::O Ravana, people who are ruled by a cruel and hostile king will not grow like the sheep protected by a jackal.
3::41::15::Under a rude, crooked king whose senses are not under his control the demons will surely perish.
3::41::16::I am faced with  this dreadful disaster accidentally. You will not only be in a miserable state because of your misdeeds, you will perish along with your army.
3::41::17::Rama will kill you not long after killing me.Hence even if I die in the hands of the enemy, my desire will be fulfilled.
3::41::18::Yu most understand that if I die at the very sight of Rama, you along with your relatives will perish with the abduction of Sita.
3::41::19::If you bring Sita from the hermitage with my assistance, know that none of us will surviveyou nor I, nor Lanka , nor the demons.
3::41::20::O Ravana, you do not understand this word of warning coming from your wellwisher. Men who are going to die do not heed the advice given by their friends.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे एकचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyfirst sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
