3::8::1::सहसौमित्रिः accompanied by Lakshmana, रामस्तु Rama too, सुतीक्ष्णेन by Sutikshna, अभिपूजितः worshipped by, तत्र there, निशाम् night, परिणाम्य having spent, प्रभाते early in the morning, प्रत्यबुध्यत again got up.
3::8::2::राघवः Rama, सहसीतया along with Sita, यथाकालम् at proper time, उत्थाय च getting up, सुशीतेन with cold water, उत्पलगन्धिना  fragrant like lilies or fragrant with lilies, जलेन with water, उपास्पृशत् took bath  
3::8::3::अथ then, वैदेही Sita, रामलक्ष्मणौ Rama and Lakshmana, ते they, काल्यम् work fit for that time, अग्निम् fire, सुरांश्चैव the gods, तपस्विशरणे refuge of ascetics, वने   forest, विधिवत् as per tradition, अभ्यर्च्य worshipped, उदयन्तम् rising, दिनकरम् Sun, दृष्ट्वा seeing, विगतकल्मषाः devoid of all sins, सुतीक्ष्णम् Sutikshna, अभिगम्य went towards, श्लक्ष्णम् good, इदम् these, वचनम् words, अब्रुवन् spoke.
3::8::4::भगवन् O revered Sutikshna, पूज्येन worshipworthy by you, त्वया by you, पूजिताः received, सुखोषिताः stayed comfortably, स्मः were, आपृच्छामः we bid you farewell, प्रयास्यामः we will go, मुनयः sages, नः us, त्वरयन्ति are hastening.
3::8::5::वयम् we, पुण्यशीलानाम् of holy men, दण्डकारण्यवासिनाम् of those residing in Dandakaranya, ऋषीणाम् of sages, कृत्स्नम् the entire, आश्रममण्डलम् circle of hermitages, द्रष्टुम् to see, त्वरामहे we are making haste.
3::8::6::धर्मनित्यैः ever engaged in nighteousness तपोदान्तैः  selfcontrolled by penance, विशिखैः without flames, पावकैरिव like fire, एभिः by these, मुनिपुङ्गवैः great sages, अभ्यनुज्ञातुम् to be granted इच्छामः desire.
3::8::7::अन्वयवर्जितः without good lineage अमार्गेण by unlawful ways, आगताम् earned, लक्ष्मीम् prosperity, प्राप्येव after getting, सूर्यः Sun, यावत् before, अविषह्यातप:  with unbearable heat (of the Sun), नातिविराजते before he comes out with blazing heat, तावत् before that, गन्तुम् to go,  इच्छामहे we desire, इति thus, उक्त्वा having said, सीतया सह along with Sita, सहसौमित्रिः with Lakshmana, रामः Rama, मुनेः sage's, चरणौ feet, ववन्दे worshipped.
3::8::8::मुनिपुङ्गव: best of the sages, चरणौ feet, संस्पृशन्तौ while touching, तौ both of them, उत्थाप्य after lifting them up, गाढम् tightly, आलिङ्य hugged, सस्नेहम् lovingly, इदम् these, वचनम् words, अब्रवीत् said.
3::8::9::राम Rama, सौमित्रिणा सह with Lakshmana, छाययेव like a shadow, अनुवृत्तया following, अनया सार्धं च with her, अरिष्टम् safe, पन्थानम् on the path, गच्छ you may go.
3::8::10::वीर O warrior, दण्डकारण्यवासिनाम् of these residing in Dandaka forest, तपसा with penance,  भावितात्मनाम् of those selfrealised souls, एषाम् of these, तपस्विनाम् sages, रम्यम् delightful, आश्रमपदम् location of hermitage, पश्य see.
3::8::11::सुप्राज्यफलमूलानि places with abundant fruits and roots, पुष्पितानि with flowers in full bloom, प्रशस्तमृगयूथानि full of herds of animals, शान्तपक्षिगणानि च with flocks of quiet birds, वनानि च forest areas, फुल्लपङ्कजषण्डानि with fully blossomed lotuses, प्रसन्नसलिलानि च having clear waters, कारण्डवविकीर्णानि filled with waterducks, तटाकानि tanks, सरांसि च and lakes, दृष्टिरम्याणि delightful to look at, गिरिप्रस्रवणानि च waterfalls coming down the hills, मयूराभिरुतानि filled with sounds of peacocks, रमणीयानि beautiful, अरण्यानि forests , द्रक्ष्यसे you will see.
3::8::12::वत्स O dear child, गम्यताम् you may go, सौमित्रे O Lakshmana, भवानपि च you also, गच्छतु may go, दृष्ट्वा after seeing, पुनरेव again, आश्रमं to hermitage, मम my, ते for you, आगन्तव्यम् you have to come here.
3::8::13::एवम् that way, उक्तः having been told, काकुत्स्थ: Rama, सहलक्ष्मणः along with Lakshmana, तथेति let it be, उक्त्वा having said this, मुनिम् to the sage, प्रदक्षिणं कृत्वा circumambulated( the sage as a mark of reverence), प्रस्थातुम् to set out, उपचक्रमे started.
3::8::14::ततः thereafter, आयतेक्षणा largeeyed lady, सीता Sita, तयोः to them, भ्रात्रोः two brothers, शुभतरे auspicious, तूणी quivers, धनुषी च bows and, ततः then, विमलौ two excellent, खङ्गौ च swords, ददौ gave.
3::8::15::तौ रामलक्ष्मणौ Rama and Lakshmana, उभौ both, शुभे auspicious ones, तूणी two quivers, आबध्य च tying up, सुस्वनौ twanging चापे च bows, आदाय after taking, गन्तुम् to go, आश्रमात् from the hermitage, निष्क्रान्तौ departed.
3::8::16::रूपसम्पन्नौ both very handsome, श्रीमन्तौ तौ राघवौ powerful Rama and Lakshmana, स्वतेजसा by their radiance, दीप्यमानौ both glowing, धृतचापौ both holding bows, सीतया सह along with Sita, शीघ्रम् quickly, प्रस्थितौ exited.
