3::69::1::एवम् thus, रामलक्ष्मणौ Rama and Lakshmana, तस्मै for him, उदकं कृत्वा after offering libation, प्रस्थितौ both started, पश्चिमाम् westward, दिशम् direction, वने in the forest, सीताम् Sita, अवेक्षन्तौ while both searching and looking, जग्मतुः went .
3::69::2::शरचापासिधारिणौ wielding bows, arrows and swords, तौ both, ऐक्ष्वाकौ two princes of the Ikshvaku race, (ताम् that), दक्षिणाम् southward, दिशम् direction, गत्वा went, अविप्रहतम् untrodden, पन्थानम् path, प्रतिपेदतुः reached.
3::69::3::बहुभिः by many, गुल्मैः by shrubs, वृक्षैश्च and  by trees, लताभिश्च and by creepers, प्रवेष्टितम् overgrown, सर्वतः all over, आवृतम् covered, दुर्गम् difficult to reach, गहनम् impenetrable, घोरदर्शनम् appearing ferocious 
3::69::4::महाबलौ two mighty princes, व्यालसिंहनिषेवितम् where serperts and lions dwell, सुभीमम् very fierceful, तत् that, महारण्यम् great forest, वेगेन swiftly, व्यतिक्रम्य after forging through, व्यतियातौ  both crossed over.
3::69::5::ततः then, परम् later, महौजसौ mighty, तौ they both, राघवौ two scions of the Raghus, जनस्थानात् from Janasthana, त्रिक्रोशम् three krosas distance (one krosa  2 miles), गम्य after going, गहनम् impassable, क्रौञ्चारण्यम् kraunchaforest, विविशतुः entered.
3::69::6::सीताहरणकर्शितौ both tormented  by the abduction of Sita, तौ they two, वैदेहीम् Vaidehi, दिदृक्षमाणौ eager to see, तत्र there, अवतिष्ठन्तौ both stopping a while, नानामेघघनप्रख्यम्  looking like dense clouds, सर्वतः all over, प्रहृष्टमिव as if it was over joyed, नानापक्षिगणैः with different birds, युक्तम्  filled, नानाव्यालमृगैः by various snakes and animals, युतम् filled with, तत् that, वनम् forest, विचिक्यतुः they both searched.
3::69::7::तदा then, भ्रातरौ the two brothers, तौ दशरथात्मजौ the two sons of Dasaratha, ततः then, पूर्वेण by eastern direction, त्रिक्रोशम् three krosas distance, गत्वा went, क्रौञ्चारण्यम्  kraunchaforest, अतिक्रम्य  crossed, मतङ्गाश्रमम् अन्तरा near the hermitage of sage Matanga, घोरम् terrific, बहुभीममृगद्विजम् filled with fearful beasts and birds, नानासत्त्वसमाकीर्णम् teeming with different kinds of creatures, गहनपादपम् dense trees, सर्वम् all, तत् that, वनम् forest, दृष्ट्वा seeing, तत्र there, (गिरौ  on the hill), पातालसमगम्भीराम् deep like the nether world, तमसा darkness, नित्यसंवृताम् always filled with, दरीम् cave, ददृशाते both saw.
3::69::8::तौ  both of them, नरव्याघ्रौ best among men, आसाद्य  reached, तस्याः from that, दर्याः from the cave, विदूरतः not very far from that place, महारूपाम् a woman of huge size, विकृताननाम् a woman of disfigured face, राक्षसीम् demoness, ददृशाते both saw.
3::69::9::ततः then, भ्रातरौ both brothers, तौ रामलक्ष्मणौ both Rama and Lakshmana, अल्पसत्त्वानाम् for the timid, भयदाम् one creating fear, बीभत्साम् a woman of uncouth appearance, रौद्रदर्शनाम्    a woman of terrific appearance, लम्बोदरीम् a woman of big stomach, तीक्ष्णदंष्ट्राम् a woman with sharp teeth, करालीम् terrific woman, भीमान् fearful, मृगान् animals, भक्षयन्तीम् was eating, विकटाम् who had huge curved skins, मुक्तमूर्धजाम् a woman with hair spread out, तत्र there, प्रैक्षेताम् saw.
3::69::10::सा she, वीरौ both heroes, तौ both, समासाद्य  coming close, एहि come on, रंस्यावहे we will both sport and enjoy sex, इति thus, उक्त्वा said, भ्रातुः brother's, अग्रतः in front of, व्रजन्तम् moving, लक्ष्मणम् Lakshmana, समालम्बत held.
3::69::11::सा she, सौमित्रिम् to Saumitri, उपगुह्य took hold of, एनम् him, वचनम् words, उवाच च spoke, अहं तु I am, अयोमुखी नाम Ayomukhi by name, ते to you, लब्धा obtained by you, त्वम् him, प्रियः dear, वीर hero, नाथ lord, इमम् this, आयुःशेषम् rest of your  life, त्वम् you, मया सह with me, पर्वतकूटेषु on the lofty hills, नदीनाम् पुलिनेषु  च on the river banks, रंस्यसे you will enjoy.
3::69::12::एवम् thus, उक्तः having been told, अरिसूदनः subduer of enemies, लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, कुपितः became angry, खड्गम् sword, उद्धृत्य after lifting, तस्याः her, कर्णनासास्तनम् ears, nose and breasts, चकर्त cut off.
3::69::13::भीमदर्शना a woman of frightening appearance, सा राक्षसी that demoness, कर्णनासे ears and nose, निकृत्ते when they were cut, विस्वरम् with cracked voice, विनद्य after shouting, यथागतम् in the same way as she came, प्रदुद्राव ran away.
3::69::14::तस्याम् when she, गतायाम् went away, व्रजन्तौ as both were advancing, भ्रातरौ two brothers, अमित्रघ्नौ both being destroyers of enemies, रामलक्ष्मणौ Rama and Lakshmana, ओजसा with their might, गहनम् dense, वनम् woods, आसेदतुः reached.
3::69::15::महातेजाः of great brilliance, सत्त्ववान् a powerful one, शीलवान् a man of good conduct, शुचिः pure, लक्ष्मणस्तु Lakshmna too, प्राञ्जलिः with folded hands, दीप्ततेजसम् glowing in splendour, भ्रातरम् his brother, वाक्यम् words, अब्रवीत् said.
3::69::16::मे my, बाहुः arm, दृढम् strongly, स्पन्दते is throbbing, मनः mind, उद्विग्नमिव is as if agitated, प्रायशः probably, अनिष्टानि undesirable ones, निमित्तानि omens, उपलक्षये I am observing.
3::69::17::आर्य O noble one, तस्मात् therefore, त्वम् you, सज्जीभव be ready, हितम् good, वचनम् words, कुरुष्व you may act upon, निमित्तानि omens, सद्यः presently, सम्भ्रमम् fear, मम I am, शंसन्ति इव हि as though they are forecasting.
3::69::18::परमदारुणः extremely dreadful, वञ्चुलको नाम  by name Vanchulaka, एषः पक्षी this bird, युद्धे in strife, आवयोः both of us, विजयम् triumph, शंसन्निव as though telling, विनर्दति cries loudly.
3::69::19::तयोः both, एवम् in that manner, ओजसा with strength, सर्वम् all over, तत् वनम् that forest, अन्वेषतोः while both were searching, तत् वनम् that forest, प्रभञ्जन्निव as if shattering, विपुलः very big, शब्दः sound, संजज्ञे broke out.
3::69::20::गगनम् sky, अत्यर्थम् very much, मातरिश्वना by fierce wind, संवेष्टितमिव was as if covered, तस्य of that, वनस्य of the forest, शब्दः sound, दिवम् sky, आपूरयन्निव was filling, अभूत् rose.
3::69::21::तं शब्दम् that sound, काङ्क्षमाणः a man looking for it, सहानुजः along with his brother, रामः Rama, कक्षे on the side, सुमहाकायम् one with a huge body, विपुलोदरम् and a big belly, राक्षसम् demon, ददर्श saw.
3::69::22::ततः then, तौ उभौ both of them, तत्र there, प्रमुखे in front, स्थितम् stood, विवृद्धम् very well grown, अशिरोग्रीवम् without head and neck, उदरे मुखम् with his face in the stomach, कबन्धम् trunk, आसेदतुः reached.
3::69::23::निचितैः by those spread all over the body, तीक्ष्णैः with sharp bristles, रोमभिः hair, उच्छ्रिचतम् mammoth figure, महागिरिमिव like a big mountain, नीलमेघनिभम् resembling a dark cloud, रौद्रम् a fierce one, मेघस्तनितनिस्वनम् voice like the thunder of the cloud. 
3::69::24::अग्निज्वालानिकाशेन resembling the flaming fire, ललाटस्थेन on the forehead, दीप्यता by the glowing, महापक्ष्मेण with huge eyelashes, पिङ्गेन with reddishbrown colour, विपुलेन huge, आयतेन च stretched , आशुदर्शिना with instant vision, घोरेण terrific one, उरसि on the chest, एकेन one, नयनेन eye, महादंष्ट्रोपपन्नम् having massive fangs, लेलिहानम् while licking his lips, महामुखम् his huge mouth, तम् him
3::69::25::महाघोरान् terrific, ऋक्षसिंहमृगद्विपान् bears, lions, deer and elephants, भक्षयन्तम् while eating, योजनम् a Yojana (eight miles), आयतौ long ones, घोरौ both frightening, उभौ both, भूजौ two arms, विकुर्वाणम् as he was stretching.
3::69::26::ऋक्षान् bears, विविधान् various, पक्षिगणान् birds, मृगान् deer, अनेकान् many, मृगयूथपान् herds of deer, कराभ्याम्  by both his hands, गृह्य taking, आकर्षन्तम् seizing, विकर्षन्तम् throwing  away, प्रपन्नयोः reached there, तयोः both the, भ्रात्रोः of brothers, पन्थानम् path, आवृत्य after blocking, स्थितम् stood. 
3::69::27::अथ then, तौ both, समभिक्रम्य after covering, क्रोशमात्रे at a distance of one krosa (2 miles), महान्तम् mighty, दारुणम् cruel, भीमम् frightening, भुजसंवृतम् his arms encircling, संस्थानात् from his form, कबन्धमिव like a trunk, घोरप्रदर्शनम् putting is a monstrous appearance, कबन्धम् one demon, Kabandha, ददर्शतुः they both saw.
3::69::28::महाबाहुः long armed one, सः he, विपुलौ very big, भुजौ both arms, अत्यर्थम् greatly, प्रसार्य  spreading, सहितावेव राघवौ brothers together, बलात् with strength, पीडयन्  pressing, जग्राह held.
3::69::29::खड्गिनौ  wielders of swords, दृढधन्वानौ  with strong bows, तिग्मतेजोवपुर्धरौ  with bodies of fiery splendour, महाबलौ mighty, भ्रातरौ both brothers, कृष्यमाणौ both being seized, विवशम् प्राप्तौ both became helpless. 
3::69::30::तत्र there, शूरः heroic, राघवः Raghava, धैर्येण with courage, नैव विव्यथे not pained, लक्ष्मणस्तु but Lakshmana, बाल्यात् being younger, आनाश्रयत्वाच्च not having much courage, अतिविव्यथे very worried, सः that, राघवानुजः brother of Rama, विषण्णस्सन् depressed, राघवम् to Rama, उवाच said,
3::69::31::वीर heroic Rama, विवशम् helpless, राक्षसस्य वशम् under the control of the demon, गतम् gone, माम् me, पश्य see, राघव Rama, एकेन by one alone, मया by me, विनिर्युक्तः offering me, परिमुञ्चस्व set yourself free.
3::69::32::माम् me, भूतबलिम् as an offering, दत्वा after giving, यथासुखम् happily, पलायस्व you may run away, वैदेहीम् Vaidehi, अचिरेण soon, अधिगन्तासि will attain her, इति this is, मे my, मतिः opinion.
3::69::33::काकुत्थ्स O scion of Kakutstha dynasty, राम Rama, पितृपैतामहीम् heriditary reign, महीम् land, प्रतिलभ्य च on getting, तत्र there, राज्यस्थः as one ruling the country, सर्वदा always, माम् me, स्मर्तुम् remember, अर्हसि should.
3::69::34::लक्ष्मणेन by Lakshmana, एवम् in that way, उक्तः having been said, रामः Rama, सौमित्रिम् to Soumitri, अब्रवीत् said, वीर heroic Lakshmana, त्रासम् fear, मा स्म कृथाः do not entertain, त्वादृक् a hero like you, न विषीदति हि  should not get desperate.
3::69::35::एतस्मिन् अन्तरे in the meanwhile, क्रूरः cruel one, दानवोत्तमः foremost of the demons, कबन्धः Kabandha, घननिर्घोषः rumbling like thunder, भ्रातरौ to the brothers, रामलक्ष्मणौ Rama and Lakshmana, पप्रच्छ questioned.
3::69::36::वृषभस्कन्धौ whose shoulders are comparable to a bull, महाखड्गधनुर्धरौ both holding great sword and bow, घोरम् dreadful, इमं देशम् this place, प्राप्तौ reached here, युवाम् you both, कौ who are you, मम for me, भक्षौ both, उपस्थितौ have reached.
3::69::37::इह here, वाम् to you both, कार्यम् work, वदतम् speak, युवाम् both, किमर्थम् for what purpose?, आगतौ have come, क्षुधार्तस्य for the hungry, इह here, तिष्ठतः while staying here, इमम् this, देशम् place, अनुप्राप्तौ came at the right time.
3::69::38::सबाणचापखड्गौ holding bows and arrows and swords, तीक्ष्णशृङ्गौ two sharp horns, ऋषभौ इव like bulls, मम my, आस्यम् mouth, अनुसम्प्राप्तौ you both have reached, पुनः again, जीवितम् lives, दुर्लभम् impossible.
3::69::39::दुरात्मनः of the evilminded, तस्य कबन्धस्य that Kabandha's, तत् that, वचनम् word, श्रुत्वा on hearing, रामः Rama, परिशुष्यता by dried up, मुखेन by mouth, लक्ष्मणम् to Lakshmna, अब्रवीत् said:
3::69::40::सत्यविक्रम  one whose valour is truth, कृच्छ्रात् from one calamity, कृच्छ्रतरम् to a greater calamity, प्राप्य having reached, प्रियाम् beloved, ताम् her, अप्राप्य having lost, जीवितान्ताय for ending life, दारुणम् unbearable, व्यसनम् crisis, प्राप्तम् experienced.
3::69::41::नरव्याघ्र tiger among men, लक्ष्मण Lakshmana, सर्वभूतेषु for all beings, कालस्य of the time, वीर्यम् power, सुमहत् great, व्यसनैः by calamity, मोहितौ afflicted, त्वां च yourself, मां me, च and, पश्य see.
3::69::42::लक्ष्मण Lakshmana, कालस्य of the time, सर्वभूतेषु over all creatures, अतिभारः great weight, नास्ति not there, शूराश्च brave people, बलवन्तश्च or strong men, रणाजिरे कृतास्त्राश्च those who know the use of arms in the war, कालाभिपन्नाः by the force of time, वालुकसेतवः यथा like barriers built with sand, सीदतन्ति make way.
3::69::43::दृढसत्यविक्रमः Firm in the strength of truth, महायशाः illustrious, प्रतापवान्  powerful, दाशरथिः Dasaratha's son (Rama), इति thus, ब्रुवाणः spoke, उदग्रपौरुषम् of mighty manliness, सौमित्रिम् Saumitri, अवेक्ष्य on seeing, तदा then, स्वाम् his own, स्थिराम् determined, मतिम् mind, आत्मना himself, अकरोत् fixed.
