3::25::1::खरः Khara, पुरस्सरैः सह accompanied by the pilot party, आश्रमम् to the hermitage, आगम्य arrived, अवष्टब्धधनुम् holding the bow, क्रुद्धम् angry, रिपुघातिनम् destroyer of the enemy, रामम् Rama, ददर्श saw.
3::25::2::तम् him, दृष्ट्वा seeing, खरनिस्स्वनम् producing terrible sound, सशरम् with the arrow, चापम् bow, उद्यम्य lifted, रामस्य Rama's, अभिमुखम् facing him, चोद्यताम् drive (the chariot), इति thus, सूतम् to charioteer, अचोदयत् ordered to go.
3::25::3::सः that, सूतः charioteer, खरस्य Khara's, आज्ञया by the order, महाबाहुः mightyarmed, एकः alone, रामः Rama, धनुः bow, चुन्वन् selecting, स्थितः stood, तुरगान् horses, समचोदयत् drove.
3::25::4::निष्पतितम् fell upon, तम् him, दृष्ट्वा seeing, सचिवाः ministers, ते they, सर्वे all, रजनीचराः demons, महानादम् very loud sound, नर्दमानाः while roaring, पर्यवारयन् surrounded.
3::25::5::तेषां यातुधानाम् of the demons, मध्ये in the midst, रथगतः seated on a chariot, खरः Khara, ताराणाम् of stars, मध्ये in the middle, उदितः risen, लोहिताङ्गः the planet Mars, इव like, बभूव looked.
3::25::6::ततः then, खरः Khara, समरे in war, शरसहस्रेण with a thousand arrows, अप्रतिमौजसम् of immeasureable prowess, रामम् to Rama, अर्दयित्वा striking, महानादम् a loud voice, ननाद made.
3::25::7::ततः thereafter, सर्वे all, क्रुद्धाः angry, निशाचराः demons, भीमधन्वानम् wielder of the fierce bow, दुर्जयम् invincible, तं रामम् to that Rama, नानाविधैः with many kinds of, शस्स्रैः weapons, अभ्यवर्षन्त rained.
3::25::8::राक्षसाः demons, रोषतत्पराः overtaken by anger, मुद्गरैः with hammers, पट्टसैः with spears, शूलैः with spikes, प्रासैः with barbed missiles, खङ्गै: with swords, परश्वधः battleaxes, समरे in war, रामम् to Rama, निजघ्नुः continously hurled.
3::25::9::वलाहकसङ्काशाः resembling clouds, महानादाः with huge uproar, महौजसः very powerful, ते demons, रथैः on chariots, वाजिभिरेव च on horses and, पर्वतकूटाभैः looking like tops of mountains, गजैः by elephants, युद्धे in war, जिघांसवः eager to kill, रामम् to Rama, अभ्यधावन्त ran towards.
3::25::10::ते they, रक्षसाम् of demons, गणाः battalions, रामे on Rama, वर्षमाणाः raining, वलाहकाः clouds, धाराभिः by downpour, शैलेन्द्रमिव like moutains, शरवर्षाणि rain of arrows, व्यसृजन् sent forth.
3::25::11::स: that, राघवः Rama, घोरैः terrible, रक्षसां गणैः by hordes of demons, परिवृत: surrounded, महादेवः Lord Siva, वृतः surrounded, परिषदाङ्गणैः with hosts of retinues, तिथिष्वि at dusk.
3::25::12::सः that, राघवः Rama, यातुधानैः by the demons, मुक्तानि released, तानि those, शस्त्राणि weapons, सागरः sea, नद्योघानिव like the flow of rivers, विशिखैः with arrows, प्रतिजग्राह resisted.
3::25::13::घोरैः by the dreadful, प्रहरणै by weapons, तैः by those, भिन्नगात्रः his limbs being hit, सः रामः that Rama, प्रदीपैः by the glowing, बहुभिः by many, वज्रैः by thunderbolts, महाचल इव like the great mountain, न विव्यथे was not hurt.
3::25::14::विद्ध: wounded, सर्वगात्रेषु all over the body, क्षतजादिग्धः bleeding through the wounds, राघवः Rama, सः रामः that Rama, सन्ध्याभ्रैः by evening clouds, आवृतः surrounded, दिवाकरः इव like the Sun, बभूव became (appeared).
3::25::15::तदा then, बहुभिः by many, सहस्रैः by thousands, समावृतम् surrounded by, एकम् single, दृष्ट्वा seeing, देवगन्धर्वाः gods and gandharvas, सिद्धाश्च siddhas, परमर्षयः great sages, विषेदुः became sad.
3::25::16::ततः thereafter, रामः Rama, सुसङ्कृद्धः mighty angry, मण्डलीकृतकार्मुकः bending the bow, शतशः in hundreds, अथ and, सहस्रशः thousands, विशिखान् unfeathered ones, बाणान् arrows, ससर्ज released.
3::25::17::रामः Rama, रणे in war, दुरावारान् those difficult to stop, दुर्विषहान् unbearable ones, कालदण्डोपमान् those looking like Yama's staff, अजिह्मगान् going straight without missing the goal, कङ्कपत्रान् arrows furnished with herons' feathers, लीलया very easily, मुमोच discharged.
3::25::18::रामेण by Rama, लीलया sportively, शत्रुसैन्येषु at the army of the enemy, मुक्ताः released, ते शराः those arrows, कालकृताः made by the god of death, पाशाः nooses, इव like, रक्षसाम् of the demons, प्राणान् life, आददुः pulled out.
3::25::19::ते शराः those arrows, तान् those, राक्षसदेहान् bodies of the demons, भित्त्वा after piercing, रुधिराप्लुताः drenched in blood, अन्तरिक्षगताः gone high up into the sky, दीप्ताग्निसमतेजसः glowing red like burning fire, रेजुः sparkled.
3::25::20::रामस्य Rama's, चापमण्डलात् from the bow bent into a circle, अतीव highly, उग्राः fierce, रक्षःप्राणापहारिणः which can take the lives of demons, असङ्ख्येयाः countless ones, सायकाः arrows, विनिष्पेतुः thrown out destroying.
3::25::21::रामः Rama, समरे in war, तैः by them (arrows), शतशः in hundreds, अथ and, सहस्रशः in thousands, धनूंषि bows, ध्वजाग्राणि tops of flags, वर्माणि च and armour, शिरांसि च and heads, सहस्ताभरणान् along with armlets, बाहून् shoulders, करिकरोपमान् like elephants' trunks, ऊरून् thighs, चिच्छेद cut.
3::25::22::काञ्चनसन्नाहान् golden ornaments, रथयुक्तान् yoked to the chariots, ससारथीन् along with charioteers, हयान् horses, सगजारोहान् with elephant riders, गजांश्च and elephants, तथा likewise, सहयान् along with horses, सादिनः horse riders, पदातीन् infantry, समरे in war, हत्वा  killed, यमसादनम् to the abode of lord of death, अनयत् sent.
3::25::23::ततः then, नालीकनाराचैः with iron arrows, तीक्ष्णाग्रैः with sharp tops, विकर्णिभिः by shafts called vikarni, भिद्यमानाः torn into parts, निशाचराः demons, भीमम् terrible, आर्तस्वरम् pitiable cries, चक्रुः made.
3::25::24::रामेण by Rama, मर्मभेदिभिः by those piercing into vital parts, निशितैः by sharp ones, बाणैः by arrows, अर्दितम् tormented, तत् सैन्यम् that army, शुष्कम् dried up, वनम् forest, अग्निना इव as if by fire, सुखम् relief न लेभे did not have.
3::25::25::भीमबलाः men of fierce strength, केचित् a few, शूराः warriors, रामस्य Rama's, अभिमुखम् going towards, गत्वा went, परमायुधान् very powerful weapons, शूलान् spikes, खङ्गान् swords, परश्वधान् axes, चिक्षिपुः threw.
3::25::26::महाबाहुः strongarmed, राघवः Rama, समरे in war, बाणैः with arrows, तेषाम् their, शस्त्राणि weapons, आवार्य attacked, प्राणान् life, जहार took, शिरोधरान् heads, चिच्छेद cut off.
3::25::27::ते they, छिन्नशिरसः broken heads, छिन्नवर्मशरासनाः broken armour and bows, सुपर्णवातविक्षिप्ताः broken tree tops fallen down by the wind of eagle's wing (blow of the the great eagle Garuda), पादपाः trees, यथा just as, जगत्याम् on the land, पेतुः fell.
3::25::28::तत्र there, अवशिष्टाः remaining ones, ये those, निशाचराः demons, शरार्दिताः hit by arrows, विषण्णाश्च desperate, खरमेव to Khara only, शरणार्थम् for refuge, अभ्यधावन्त ran towards.
3::25::29::दूषणः Dusana, तान् स them, सर्वान् all, समाश्वास्य pacifying, पुनः again, आदाय bringing them together, क्रुद्धः wrathful, अन्तकः yama, रुद्रमिव like Rudra, काकुत्स्थं on Rama, अभ्यधावत ran towards.
3::25::30::सर्वे all, दूषणाश्रयनिर्भयाः were free from fear due to Dusana's protection, पुनः again, निवृत्ताः returned, सालतालशिलायुधाः carrying sal, palm and stones as weapons, राममेव to Rama, अभ्यधावन्त advanced towards.
3::25::31::शूलमुद्गरहस्ताश्च spears and hammers in their hands, चापहस्ताः bows in hands, महाबलाः extremely strong, राक्षसाः demons, संयुगे in war, शरवर्षाणि rain of  arrows, शस्त्रवर्षाणि rain of weapons, सृजन्तः poured, द्रुमवर्षाणि rain of trees, शिलावर्षाणि rain of stones, मुञ्चन्तः  continuously released.
3::25::32::पुनः again, रामस्य Rama's, तेषां रक्षसां च of those demons, तुमुलम् fierce, अद्भुतम् wonderful, रोमहर्षणम् horripilating, महाघोरम् very dreadful, तत् युद्धम् that war, बभूव became.
3::25::33::ते they, अतिक्रुद्धाः mighty angry, पुनः again, राघवम् at Rama, समन्तात् from all directions, अभ्ययुः advanced towards, महाबलः mighty, सः he, उद्यतप्रासैः by raised missiles, शरवर्षिभिः raining arrows, तैः by them, सर्वाः all, दिशः quarters, प्रदिशश्च also intermediate directions, समावृताः were covered, दृष्ट्वा seeing, भैरवम् frightening, नादम् sound, कृत्वा produced, राक्षसेषु at the demons, परमभास्वरम् very dazzling, गान्धर्वम् belonging to gandharva, अस्त्रम् weapon, संयोजयत aimed at.
3::25::34::ततः then, चापमण्डलात् from the the bow bent round, शरसहस्राणि thousands of arrows, निर्ययुः let out, समागतैः by approaching, बाणैः by arrows, सर्वाः all, दश ten, दिशः quarters, अवार्यन्त were filled. 
3::25::35::शरार्दिताः hurt by the arrows, ते राक्षसाः the demons, घोरान् terrible, शरान् arrows, आददानम् taking out, न पश्यन्ति could not see, शिलीमुखान् arrows, मुञ्चन्तम् sending forth, न not, विकर्षमाणम्  shooting arrow.
3::25::36::शरान्धकारम् darkness created by the arrows, सदिवाकरम् along with the Sun, आकाशम् sky, आवृणोत् covered, रामः Rama, तान् those, शरान् arrows, प्रवमन्निव as if vomitting, अवस्थितः stationed, भभूव appeared.
3::25::37::वसुधा earth, युगपत् simultaneously, पतमानैश्च fallen down, हतैश्च by those slain, पतितैश्चैव by those who fell on the ground, भृशम् exceedingly, विकीर्णा scattered all over, अभवत् appeared.
3::25::38::ते राक्षसाः they, demons, निहताः killed, तत्र तत्र all over there, सहस्रशः in their thousands, पतिताः fallen, क्षीणाः thinned down, छिन्नाः cut into pieces, भिन्नाः those broken pieces, विदारिताः those pierced, दृश्यन्ते स्म were found.
3::25::39::समरे in war, सोष्णीषैः with headgears, उत्तमाङ्गैश्च heads (best part of body), तथा like that, साङ्गदैः armlets, बाहुभिः with shoulders, छिन्नैः cut to pieces, ऊरुभिः with thighs, जानुभिः with knees, नानारूपैर्विभूषणैः with different kinds of arms, अनेकशः in many ways, हयैश्च with horses, द्विपमुख्यैश्च with best of elephants, भिन्नैः by those broken, रथैः with chariots, चामरैः by fans made of yaktail, व्यजनैः by fans, छत्रैः by umbrellas, नानाविधैः of several kinds, ध्वजैः by flags, रामस्य Rama's, बाणाभिहतैः destroyed by arrows, विचित्रैः by different kinds, शूलपट्टिशैः by spears, खण्डीकृतैः by the broken ones, खङ्गैः with swords, प्रासैः by darts, विकीर्णैः by the  scattered, परश्वधैः by battleaxes, चूर्णिताभिः by those crushed into small pieces, शिलाभिश्च stones, अनेकशः many, विच्छिन्नैः broken, शरैः arrows, विकीर्णा scattered, भूमिः on the ground, भयंकरा frightening, अभूत्  to see.
