3::53::1::Sita, daughter of Janaka, princess of Mithila felt miserable, looking at Ravana taking off and got very  much agitated out of fear.
3::53::2::While being carried away, Sita wept piteously and her eyes went red with tears of anger and grief. Looking at the frightening eyes of the king of the demons, she said these words :
3::53::3::O mean Ravana, are you not ashamed of kidnapping me when I was separated (from my husband)?
3::53::4::O wicked fellow, with an intention to abduct me you enticed my husband to a distance deceitfully in the form of a deer.
3::53::5::This Jatayu, an old friend of my fatherinlaw tried to protect me but he too has fallen a prey.
3::53::6::O lowly demon, you have, indeed, shown your heroism  (in killing this old vulture). You have not won me in a battle declared by you.
3::53::7::O lowly fellow how is it that you are not ashamed of commiting such a despicable act  abducting another's wife when she is alone ? 
3::53::8::You consider yourself to be brave after committing such a cruel, despicable and unrighteous act for which people of the world will condemn you.
3::53::9::Fie upon your heroism and strength about which you boasted. Fie upon your character that would bring calumny to the race and the world. I condemn such behaviour of yours.
3::53::10::Tarry a little, you will not go back with life. What can be done now since you are running away so swiftly?
3::53::11::If you come within sight of these two princes, it will not be possible for you to live for a moment even if you are with your entire army.
3::53::12::Just as a bird cannot bear the touch of forest fire, you will not be able to endure the mere touch of arrows of the two heroes indeed.
3::53::13::O Ravana be good and do whatever is beneficial to you. It is proper for you to release me. If you do not, enraged over my assault, my husband along with his brother, will bring about your destruction.
3::53::14::O vile creature, the effort you are making to abduct me forcibly will be fruitless.
3::53::15::I will not be eager to hold on to my life for long to live at the mercy of the enemy without being able to see my godlike husband.
3::53::16::At the time of death, mortals behave very differently. They act contrary to their own welfare. Likewise you are not able to foresee what is beneficial and good for you.
3::53::17::Those who wish to die, do not like anything salutary. I see the noose of death wound round your neck now.
3::53::18::O tenheaded Ravana, since you do not fear the source of fear, evidently you see golden trees. (a symptom of death).
3::53::19::O Ravana, you see the dreadful river Vaitarani with torrents of blood flowing and frightening forest of trees with swords as leaves.
3::53::20::You will see a log of salmali tree with bright golden flowers and excellent vaidurya stone with pointed iron thorns.
3::53::21::You are pitiless. You will not be able to survive for long after deceiving such noble Rama just as man cannot survive after drinking poison.
3::53::22::O Ravana you are bound by the inevitable noose of death. Where shall you get away from great Rama, my husband to obtain peace.
3::53::23::Rama has killed fourteen thousand demons alone without his brother within a moment. He is a strong warrior and wellversed in the use of all kinds of weapons. You have stolen his loving wife. How can he live without killing you.
3::53::24::Sita, daughter of Videha, full of sorrow and fear under Ravana's grip uttered these partly harsh and partly piteous wordsweeping.
3::53::25::Sinful Ravana carried away the beautiful princess trembling with great fear, struggling helplessly, crying pathetically and pleading in many mournful ways.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे त्रिपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftythird sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
