3::3::1::Graceful Lakshmana asked  Viradha  with a smile, Who are you wandering in the forest at will ?.
3::3::2::Then Viradha with his voice filling the forest said, Instead of asking about me you both should speak out who  you are and where you are going
3::3::3::Questioned by the demon, who bore a burning countenance, the highly effulgent Rama introduced his Ikshvaku family:
3::3::4::Know us to be both kshatriyas, endowed with a good lineage and yet moving in the forest. We both wish to know, who you are and why you are going about in Dandaka forest?
3::3::5::Then Viradha said to Rama whose truth was his strength, I will tell you who I am. O, listen:
3::3::6::I am indeed son to Jaya. My mother is Satahrada. Verily all the demons on this earth call me Viradha.
3::3::7::By the grace of Lord Brahma I was bestowed with this prowess through my penance. In this world none can kill me with a weapon nor split nor cut me to pieces.
3::3::8::Therefore, leave this lady and run away to the place you came from. I will not take away your life .
3::3::9::With eyes reddened with anger Rama replied to the sinful, deformed Viradha:
3::3::10::O vile, mean creature  surely you are seeking death. Wait, you will meet it in the fight.
3::3::11::Then Rama strung his bow immediately, shot the sharp arrows at Viradha and hit him verily.
3::3::12:: From his bow  strung tight,  Rama shot seven swift, goldenfeathered arrows comparable to Garuda  and the Windgod in speed.
3::3::13::The arrows tied with peacockfeathers, looking like fire, pierced the body of Viradha which, drenched in blood, fell on the ground.
3::3::14::Hit  by Rama and Lakshmana, the enraged  demon left Vaidehi, lifted a sharp spear   and ran towards them.
3::3::15::The demon who produced a great noise with his wide open mouth resembled the god of death. He lifted a sharp spike that looked like Indra's banner.
3::3::16::And then both the brothers showered bright arrows on the demon Viradha who looked like Yama, the god of death.
3::3::17::The demon who was extremely frightening stood there, laughing and yawning.  As he yawned, all the swiftlyflying arrows fell out of his body.
3::3::18::By virtue of a boon Viradha, the demon, controlled the vital breath of his body by a mere touch and, raising the spike, ran towards the two Raghava princes.
3::3::19::With two arrows, Rama, the best among wielders of weapons, broke down the spike in the sky burning like fire, and resembling the  thunderbolt of Indra.
3::3::20::The spike, broken down by Rama's arrow, fell like a slab of mount Meru splintered by Indra's thunder.
3::3::21::Then both Rama and Lakshmana quickly raised their swords which looked like black serpents and at once fell upon the demon who was going to strike with great force.
3::3::22::Struck down, the angry demon tightly caught hold of both of them under his arms and wanted to set out, carrying Rama and Lakshmana, the two unshakeable tigers among men. 
3::3::23::Rama understood the intention of the demon and said to Lakshmana, Let him go his way, no need to stop him.
3::3::24::O Lakshmana, let the nightstalker go the way he wishes. That is, in fact, our path.
3::3::25::Puffed up with his own great strength, Viradha lifted them and placed them on his shoulders as though they were two children.
3::3::26::Then the nightstalker proceeded towards the forest, carrying both the scions of the Raghu race on his shouldersroaring.
3::3::27::Viradha entered the forest which appeared like a huge cloud. Overgrown with different types of large trees, it abounded in wonderful birds, jackals and other wild animals.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे तृतीयस्सर्गः।। Thus ends the third sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki. 
