3::17::1::Ablution over, Rama, accompanied by Sita and Lakshmana, went back from the bank of the river Godabari to their hermitage.
3::17::2::On reaching the hermitage, Rama and Lakshmana performed the forenoon rituals and entered the leafthatched cottage.
3::17::3::Honoured by the ascetics , Rama  stayed there peacefully with brother Lakshmana, discussing diverse matters (from time to time).
3::17::4::Longarmed Rama seated with Sita in the cottage, appeared like the Moon in conjunction with constellation Chitra.
3::17::5::While Rama was thus seated, engrossed in conversation, there incidentally appeared a demoness.
3::17::6::Surpanakha, sister of the tenheaded demon (Ravana) approached Rama shining like a god.
3::17::7::The demoness was infatuated with Rama,  whose chest was like that of a lion, who was strongarmed, who had a glowing face, pleasing to the eyes, who walked with the gait of an elephant, whose hair was matted,  who was gentle and strong who was, endowed with royal traits, who had a blue lotuslike complexion, who was handsome as the god of love, and who resembled Indra.
3::17::8::Rama's face was lovely, Surpanakha's was hideous. Rama had a slender waist, she had a huge belly. His eyes were large,  hers were deformed. His hair was black and beautiful, hers was coppercoloured. He was lovely in appearance, she was ugly. His voice was sweet, hers was shrill. He was young, she was dreadfully old. He was positive, she was perverted. Rama was wellbehaved, she was wicked. Rama was just and loving while she was overcome by lust.  (This) demoness said to Rama :
3::17::9::O Rama you are wearing matted hair like an ascetic, but living with your wife and holding bow and arrows. What brings you to this place haunted by demons ? You should tell me the truth ?
3::17::10::Thus asked by the demoness Surpanakha,  Rama, scorcher of foes began telling her everything due to his simplemindedness.
3::17::11::To Rama untruth is never acceptable at the hermitage and especially in the presence of a woman.
3::17::12::(Rama replied) There was a king named Dasaratha who was mighty like the gods. I am his eldest son known among the people as Rama.
3::17::13::Here is Lakshmana , my younger brother, who always follows me . And this  is the daughter of the king of Videha and my wife, wellknown as Sita. 
3::17::14::I have come here, commanded by the king, my father and mother.Intending to obey the orders of my father, and impelled by duty to  establish righteousness I have come  to reside here. 
3::17::15::I wish to know who you are. Tell me who your kins are. With lovely limbs you do not appear to be a demoness.
3::17::16::Tell me truly what you have come here for. Having heard the words of Rama and overtaken by passion, the demoness said:
3::17::17::My name is Surpanakha. I am a demoness who can assume any form at will, I move in this forest alone, unleashing a reign of terror.
3::17::18::My brother is Ravana, son of Visrava, and lord of all demons. You have heard his name I suppose.
3::17::19::Kumbhakarna is another brother of mine. He is very strong. He is always in deep sleep. Vibhisna another brother. He is righteous free from  any demoniac trait. My other two brothers are Khara and Dusana who are wellknown heroes of war.
3::17::20::Setting them aside, I came here, as soon as I saw you. You are the finest among men and I am here wishing you to be my husband.
3::17::21::I have influence over others, I have capacity to move wherever I want. Be my husband forever. What will you do with Sita?
3::17::22::She is ugly, deformed, unsuitable for you. I  am alone  fit for you. Look upon me as your wife.
3::17::23::I will devour your brother along with this disfigured, unchaste and fearful lady with a flat belly.
3::17::24::O darling, thereafter you can keep wandering with me in this Dandaka forest, enjoying the beauty of the mountain tops and forests. 
3::17::25::Thus addressed, Rama, skilled in speech, laughed and started speaking to that woman of bewitching eyes.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये अरण्यकाण्डे सप्तदशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the seventeenth sarga of Aranyakanda of the holy Ramayana the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
