5::43::1::Having slain the kinkaras, Hanuman stood and reflected, ' I have ruined the garden and not the palatial buildings that are like temples (Chaityas)'. Then Hanuman, son of the Windgod, decided in his mind to show his strength and jumped on to the top of the palatial building that appeared like the peak of mount Meru.
5::43::2::The powerful vanara leader climbed the tall, palatial building which resembled a mountain. He looked like another Sun, just risen.
5::43::3::Having destroyed the fine palace building, the indomitable Hanuman was blazing with glory like the mountain Pariyatra. (one of the seven Kula mountains viz., Mahendra, Malaya, Sahya, Shuktiman, Riksha, Vindhya and Pariyatra) 
5::43::4::Hanuman heaved his body  huge  with his prowess and patted his arms loudly filling the city of Lanka with that terrible sound.
5::43::5::By the deafening sound caused by the patting, the birds fell down and the guards of the palace lost consciousness.
5::43::6::'May Sri Rama, unsurpassed in the use of missiles be victorious May his brother, mighty Lakshmana, a matchless warrior be victorious. May King Sugriva ruled by Rama be victorious.' 
5::43::7::'I am the son of the Windgod, destroyer of enemy army. I am a servant of Rama, the king of Kosala who can accomplish any task with ease. 
5::43::8::'Not even a thousand Ravanas can stand my might  in combat as I start assailing them with thousands of  rocks or even trees.  
5::43::9::'I shall return only after accomplishing the destruction of the city of Lanka and offering obeisance to Sita, while all demons keep looking at me'.
5::43::10::Having made proclamations that way from the top of the Vimana (palace) the monkey leader roared making terrific sound frightening the ogres.
5::43::11::Hearing the terrific sound, a hundred gigantic guards of the palace set forth, holding different kinds of weapons like darts, swords and axes and hurled at Maruti surrounding him.
5::43::12::Holding astonishing maces decorated with gold, iron crowbars and sharp arrows resembling the rays of the Sun the ogres hit Hanuman, the foremost of vanaras. 
5::43::13::The demons surrounding the great monkey looked like a big whirlpool of the water of the river Ganga.
5::43::14::Thereupon the infuriated son of the Windgod, assumed a fearsome form, uprooted a pillar of the palace decked with gold and holding that hundred edged pillar whirled it round swiftly.
5::43::15::Thereafter fire was generated (through friction) and with if the palace blazed. Hanuman saw the palace burning. He killed a hundred demons there as Indra killed demons with his thunderbolt. (The whirling pillar that generated fire apeared like a thunderbolt) Later he stood in the air and proclaimed this:
5::43::16::Thousands of huge and mighty monkeys, equal to me, loyal to king Sugriva, are coming under the orders and have been recruited from the entire earth. They  are the best among monkeys.
5::43::17::Of them some have the strength equal to ten elephants, others are ten times stronger, and still others have a thousand elephants' strength.
5::43::18::Some have the strength of flood waters, some are powerful as wind and yet others have strength beyond measure. 
5::43::19::Sugriva will come here with hundreds of thousands of crores of vanaras who would be fighting with their teeth and nails as weapons. 
5::43::20::You have established great enmity with the noble lord of Ikshvaku dynasty. Neither this Lanka will endure nor you, nor even Ravana will be traced.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे त्रिचत्वारिशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortythird sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
