5::44::1::महादंष्ट्रः one with big front teeth, धनुर्धरः bow in hand, रक्तमाल्याम्बरधरः adorned with a garland of red flowers and red clothes, स्रग्वी wearing a chaplet, रुचिरकुण्डलः with beautiful earrings, महान् great, विवृत्तनयनः who had big round eyes, चण्डः fierce, समरदुर्जयः  invincible in war, बली mighty, प्रहस्तस्य सुतः son of Prahasta,जम्बुमाली Jambumali,राक्षसेन्द्रेण by the demon king, सन्दिष्टः commanded, महत् huge, रुचिरसायकम् who had radiant arrows, वज्राशनिसमस्वनम् making sounds like thunderbolt, शक्रधनुःप्रख्यम् like Indra's splendid bow (a rainbow), धनुः bow, वेगेन very swiftly, विष्फारयाणः as if thundering, निर्जगाम went out. 
5::44::2::तस्य his, धनुषः bow's, महता by the huge, विष्फारघोषेण by the twang, दिशः all directions, प्रदिशश्चैव and intermediate directions, नभश्चैव heavens also, सहसा at once, समपूर्यत were filled. 
5::44::3::खरयुक्तेन drawn by donkeys, रथेन by the chariot, आगतम् reached, तम् him, उदीक्षय after seeing, सः हनुमान् that Hanuman, वेगसम्पन्नः who was endowed with speed, जहर्ष च felt glad, ननाद च and made a loud noise.
5::44::4::महाबाहुः strongarmed one, जम्बुमाली Jambumali, तोरणविटङ्कस्थम् who stood on top of the exit archway, महाकपिम् great monkey, तं हनुमन्तम् that Hanuman, निशितैः with sharp, शरैः with arrows, विव्याध hit hard.
5::44::5::अर्धचन्द्रेण with a crescentshaped arrow, वदने on the face, एकेन with one, कर्णिना ear shaped arrow, शिरसि on the head, दशभिः ten, नाराचैः iron arrows, बाह्वोः into the arms, तं कपीश्वरम् that lord of monkeys, विव्याध hit.  
5::44::6::शरेण by an arrow, अभिहतम् struck, ताम्रम् reddish, तत् his, मुखम् face, शरदि in autumn, भास्करश्मिना with Sun's radiance, विद्धम् hit, फुल्लम् blown, अम्बुजमिव like a lotus, शुशुभे appeared. 
5::44::7::रक्तेन by blood, रञ्जितम् glowing, रक्तम् red, तस्य his, तत् that, मुखम् face, चन्दनबिन्दुभिः with sandal drops, सिक्तम् sprinkled, आकाशे in the sky, महापद्मं यथा like a great lotus, शुशुभे looked bright.
5::44::8::बाणाभिहतः struck by the shafts, महाकपिः great monkey, राक्षसस्य of the demon, चुकोप enraged, ततः then, पार्श्वे lying beside, अतिविपुलाम् huge, महतीम् on the ground, शिलाम् rock, ददर्श he saw. 
5::44::9::बली a powerful one, ताम् that boulder, तरसा with vehemence, समुत्पाट्य having lifted, बलवत् with his strength, चिक्षेप hurled, राक्षसः giant, क्रुद्धः angrily, ताम् that rock, दशभिः with ten, शरैः with arrows, ताडयामास smashed.
5::44::10::चण्डविक्रमः who had fierce power, वीर्यवान् a warrior, हनुमान् Hanuman, तत् that कर्म action, विपन्नम् failed, दृष्ट्वा seeing, विपुलम् huge, सालम् sala tree, उत्पाट्य pulled out, भ्रामयामास whirled. 
5::44::11::महाबलः mighty, जम्बुमाली Jambumali, सालवृक्षम् sala tree, भ्रामयन्तम् after whirling, महाबलम् mighty, कपिम् monkey, दृष्ट्वा after seeing, सुबहून् many, बाणान् arrows, चिक्षेप fired. 
5::44::12::सालम् sala tree, चतुर्भिः with four, चिच्छेद cut off, वानरम् vanara, पञ्चभिः with five, भुजे on his arm, उरसि on his chest, एकेन बाणेन with one arrow, स्तनान्तरे in the hollow of the chest, दशभिः with ten. 
5::44::13::शरैः arrows, पूरिततनु: the body was filled, सः that, महता intense, क्रोधेन with anger, वृतः endowed, वेगितः speedily, तं परिघमेव the same iron spear, गृह्य seized, भ्रामयामास started whirling. 
5::44::14::बलोत्कटः of immeasurable strength, अतिवेगः a hero of great speed, परिघम् iron spear, अतिवेगेन with great speed, भ्रामयित्वा after turning round and round, जम्बुमालेः on Jambumali, महोरसि on the broad chest, पातयामास hurled.  
5::44::15::तत्र there, तस्य his, शिरः चैव even head, नास्ति not there, बाहू shoulders, न not, जानुनी knees, न not, धनुः bow, न not, रथः chariot, न not, अश्वाः donkeys, horses, नादृश्यन्तः not there to discern, इषवः न nothing was seen.
5::44::16::तेन by that blow, हतः killed, महाबलः mighty, जम्बुमाली Jambumali, सहसा inconsiderately, निहतः having been killed, चूर्णिताङ्गविभूषणः with his ornaments reduced to powder, भूमौ on the floor, पपात fell down.
5::44::17::रावणः Ravana, जम्बुमालिं च even Jambumali, निहतम् being klled, महाबलान् of great strength, किंकरांश्च and kinkaras also, श्रुत्वा hearing, कोपसंरक्तलोचनः bloodshot eyes, चुक्रोध got enraged.  
5::44::18::महाबले who had great strength, प्रहस्तपुत्त्रे Prahasta's son, निहते killed, सः निशाचरेश्वरः demon king, रोषसंवर्तितताम्रलोचनः his eyes red and rolling in anger, आशु quickly, अतिवीर्यविक्रमान् highly valiant wariors, अमात्यपुत्रान् sons of ministers, समादिदेश commanded. 
