5::1::1::ततः then, शत्रुकर्शनः crusher off enemies, रावणनीतायाः carried by Ravana, सीतायाः Sita's, पदम् whereabouts, अन्वेष्टुम् to search, चारणाचरिते where charanas the celestial bards move, पथि way, इयेष resolved .  
5::1::2::वानरः vanara, दुष्करम् formidable, निष्प्रतिद्वन्द्वम् which could not be challenged, चिकीर्षन् intending to (cross), समुदग्रशिरोग्रीवः raised his head and neck, गवां पतिः इव like the best of bulls, बभौ appeared. 
5::1::3::अथ then, महाबलः mighty, धीरः calm, वैडूर्यवर्णेषु of the colour of vaidurya (tawny), सलिलकल्पेषु on the sheet of water (marshy land with green grass that looked like sheet of water), शाद्वलेषु on green grassy lands, यथासुखम् very easily, विचचार strdled. 
5::1::4::धीमान् wise, द्विजान् birds, वित्रासयन् scaring, उरसा with his chest, पादपान् trees, हरन् uprooting, प्रवृद्धः grown, केसरी इव like a lion, सुबहून् groups, मृगांश्च animals also, निघ्नन् trampling. 
5::1::5::नीललोहितमांजिष्ठपत्रवर्णैः blue, red, yellow and green coloured, सितासितैः as well as with white and black colours, स्वभावविहितैः in their natural state, चित्रैः by wonderful ones, धातुभिः with minerals, समलङ्कृतम् decorated all over, कामरूपिभिः by those who take any form at free will, सपरिच्छदैः  all surrounded by their retinue, यक्षकिन्नरगन्धर्वैः by yakshas, kinneras and gandharvas,अभीक्ष्णम् very much, आविष्टम् occupied, र्देवकल्पैश्च resembling gods, पन्नगैः by nagas.
5::1::6::सः that, कपिवरः leader of monkeys, तत्र there, नागवरायुते with lordly elephants, तस्य गिरिवर्यस्य at the great mountain, तले foot, तिष्ठन् stood, ह्रदे centre, नागः इव like elephant, अबभौ looked. 
5::1::7:: सः that, सूर्याय to the Sun, महेन्द्राय to Mahendra, lord of the gods, पवनाय to the wind god, स्वयंभुवे to the creator, Brahma, भूतेभ्यः the attendants of lord Siva अञ्जलिम् salutations with folded palms, कृत्वा offered, गमने to go, मतिम् resolution, चकार he made. 
5::1::8::प्राङ्मुखः facing the east, आत्मयोनये his father, पवनाय windgod, अञ्जलिम् salutations with folded palms, कृत्वा having offered, ततः then, दक्षिण with equanimity, दक्षिणां दिशम् southern direction, गन्तुम् to depart, ववृधे हि grew in size. 
5::1::9::प्लवङ्गप्रवरैः the monkey troops, दृष्टः were gazing, प्लवने  taking leap, कृतनिश्चयः  resolved, पर्वसु during the fullmoon days, समुद्रः इव like the sea, रामवृद्ध्यर्थम् for the welfare of Rama, ववृधे began to grow in size. 
5::1::10::अर्णवम् ocean, लिलङ्घयिषुः one wishing to cross over, निष्प्रमाणशरीरः having an immeasurable figure, सन् while being, बाहुभ्याम् with both his arms, चरणाभ्यां च and with feet, पर्वतम् mountain, पीडयामास pressed.
5::1::11::कपिपीडितः pressed firmly by Hanuman, सः अचलश्चापि that mountain also, मुहूर्तम् for a moment, चचाल was shaken, पुष्पिताग्राणाम् flowers on the top, तरूणाम् of trees, सर्वम् all, पुष्पम् flowers, अशातयत् dropped down. 
5::1::12:: शैलः the mountain, पादपमुक्तेन by those dropped down from the trees, सुगन्धिना full of fragrance, पुष्पौघेण heap of flowers, सर्वतः all over, संवृतः covered, यथा like, बभौ appeared, पुष्पमय: made of flowers. 
5::1::13::उत्तमवीर्येण by the highly valiant self, तेन by him, पीड्यमानः  pressed very hard, सः पर्वतः that mountain, मत्तः intoxicated, द्विपः elephant, मदम् इव like the rut, सलिलम् the water, सम्प्रसुस्राव exuded profusely.
5::1::14::बलिना by the powerful, तेन by him, पीड्यमानः having pressed, महेन्द्रः पर्वतः mount Mahendra, काञ्चनाञ्चनराजतीः of gold and silver, रीतीः streams, निर्वर्तयामास started forming. 
5::1::15::शैलः mountain, मध्यमेन in the midst, अर्चिषा by the flame, जुष्टा:possed with, अनलः fire, धूमराजीरिव like the columns of smoke, समनः शिलाः along with sulphur pigments, विशालाः big one, शिलाः boulders, मुमोच threw out, च even. 
5::1::16::गुहाविष्टानि of the caves, भूतानि creatures, पीड्यमानेन being pressed, गिरिणा by the mountain, सर्वतः all over, पीड्यमानानि on account of pressing, विकृतैः with horrible, स्वरैः voices, विनेदुः shrieked. 
5::1::17::शैलपीडानिमित्तजः caused by the crushing of the mountain, सः that, महासत्त्वसन्नादः loud noise of various creatures, पृथिवीम् the earth, दिशश्च all directions, उपवनानि च and the surrounding groves, पूरयामास filled. 
5::1::18::सर्पाः snakes, व्यक्तस्वस्तिकलक्षणैः with signs of swastika marks, पृथुभिः by wide ones, शिरोभिः with hoods, घोरम् terrible, पावकम् fire, वमन्तः poured out, दशनैः with fangs, शिलाः ददंशुः bit the rocks.
5::1::19::तदा then, सविषैः by the venomous, कुपितैः by the angry, तैः by them, दष्टाः bitten, ताः महाशिलाः the huge rocks, पावकोददीप्ताः burnt by the flame, जज्वलुः burnt, सहस्रधा in a thousand pieces, बिभिदुश्च and broke. 
5::1::20::तस्मिन् पर्वते on that mountain, जातानि grown, यानि those, औषथजालानि medicinal herbs, विषघ्नान्यपि even those which can counteract poison, नागानाम् of the snakes, विषम् poison, शमितुम् to neutralize, न शेकुः were not able to. 
5::1::21::अयम् this, गिरिः mountain, भूतैः by creatures, भिद्यते broken, इति thus, मत्त्वा after, तपस्विनः ascetics, उत्पेतुः jumped up, विद्याधराः Vidyadharas, त्रस्ताः terrified, पानभूमिगतम् from the drinking places, हैमम् golden, आसवभाजनम् drinking cups, महार्हाणि valuable ones, करकांश्च goblets, उच्चावचान् various big and small ones, लेह्यान् food that is licked, भक्ष्यान् eatables, विविधानि of many kinds, मांसानि meat, आर्षभाणि of oxen, चर्माणि animal hides, कनकत्सरून् covered with golden sheaths, खडगांश्च swords, हित्वा after, स्त्रीगणैः सह along with groups of women, तस्मात् from that place, उत्पेतुः flew away.  
5::1::22::कृतकण्ठगुणाः wearing chains, क्षीबाः intoxicated ones, रक्तमाल्यानुलेपनाः wearing garlands and smearing with red unguents (sandalpaste), रक्ताक्षाः with red eyes, पुष्कराक्षाश्च with lotus like eyes, गगनम् to the sky, प्रतिपेदिरे flew into the sky. 
5::1::23::हारनूपुरकेयूरपारिहार्यधराः wearing necklaces, anklets and armlets, स्त्रियः women, विस्मिताः wonderstruck, सस्मिताः gently  smiling, रमणैः सह with their lovers, आकाशे in the sky, तस्थुः stayed. 
5::1::24::विद्याधरमहर्षयः the seers among vidyadharas, महाविद्याम् proficient in different fields of knowledge, दर्शयन्तः watching, सहिताः collectively, आकाशे in the sky, तस्थुः stayed, पर्वतम् mountain, वीक्षांचक्रुश्च were also watching. 
5::1::25:: तदा then, विमले in a pure, अम्बरे in the sky, स्थितानाम् of those stationed, चारणानाम् of charanas, सिद्धानाम् of siddhas, भावितात्मनाम् of highly, ऋषीणां च and of seers, शब्दम् sound, शुश्रुवुः heard. 
5::1::26::पर्वतसङ्काशः resembling a mountain, मारुतात्मजः son of the windgod (Hanuman), महावेगः swift, एषः him, हनुमान् Hanuman, मकरालयम् abode of crocodiles, समुद्रम् ocean, तितीर्षति desiring to cross.
5::1::27::रामार्थम् for the purpose of Rama, वानरार्थं च for the sake of vanaras also, दुष्करम् impossible, कर्म task, चिकीर्षन् desirous of achieving, समुद्रस्य of the ocean, दुष्प्रापम् difficult to reach, परं पारम् the other side, प्राप्तुम् to reach, इच्छति he wishes. 
5::1::28::विद्याधराः vidyadharas, इति thus, महात्मनाम् of great sages, तेषाम् of them, वचः word, श्रुत्वा having heard, पर्वते on the mountain, अप्रमेयम् beyond measure, वानरर्षभम् bull among the vanaras, Hanuman, तम् him, ददृशुः saw. 
5::1::29::अचलोपमः huge as  mountain, सः he, रोमाणि hair, दुधुवे shook, चकम्पे च and moved, सुमहान् great, तोयदः इव like a cloud, सुमहानादम् huge sound, ननाद produced.
5::1::30::उत्पतिष्यन् ready to take off, आनुपूर्व्येण in an order, वृत्तम् covered, लोमभिः with hair, चितम् full of, लाङ्गूलम् tail, पक्षिराजः king of birds, उरगं इव like a serpent, विचिक्षेप shook, cast down. 
5::1::31::आत्तवेगस्य of great, तस्य his, पृष्ठतः at the back, अविद्धम् curled, लाङ्गूलम् tail, गरुडेन by Garuda, ह्रियमाणः carried off, महोरगः इव like a big serpent, ददृशे appeared. 
5::1::32::कपिः monkey, महापरिघसन्निभौ like huge iron clubs, बाहू arms, संस्तम्भयामास pressing down firmly , कट्याम् in the waist, ससाद crouched in, चरणौ his feet, सञ्चुकोच च contracted. 
5::1::33::श्रीमान् glorious, वीर्यवान् courageous, सः Hanuman, भुजौ च even shoulders, तथैव च in the same way, शिरोधराम् his head, संहृत्य after contracting, तेजः glow, सत्त्वम् energy, तथा so also, वीर्यम् vigour, आविवेश summoned up. 
5::1::34::ऊर्ध्वम् upward, प्रणिहितेक्षणः setting his eyes up, दूरात् from a distance, मार्गम् direction, आलोकयन् while looking at, आकाशम् sky, अवलोकयन् looking at, प्राणान् breath, हृदये in the chest,रुरोध restrained. 
5::1::35::कपिकुञ्जरः an elephant among monkeys, महाबलः very strong one, वानरश्रेष्ठः best of vanaras, सः हनुमान् that Hanuman, पद्भ्याम् feet, दृढम् firmly, अवस्थानम् standing in that position, कृत्वा did, कर्णौ ears, निकुञ्च्य contracted, उत्पतिष्यन् while preparing to leap, वानरान् vanaras, इदम् this, वचनम् word, अब्रवीत् said.
5::1::36::राघवनिर्मुक्तः released by Raghava, शरः arrow, यथा similar manner, गच्छेत् goes, तद्वत् like that, श्वसनविक्रमः with the speed of wind, रावणपालिताम् governed by Ravana, लङ्काम् Lanka, गमिष्यामि I will reach.
5::1::37::लङ्कायाम् in Lanka, तां जनकात्मजाम् that daughter of Janaka, न हि द्रक्ष्यामि यदि If I am not able to find, अनेन with this, वेगेनैव हि with speed indeed, सुरालयम् abode of gods, गमिष्यामि I will go. 
5::1::38::त्रिदिवे in heaven, सीताम् Sita, न द्रक्ष्यामि यदि वा If I do not find, अकृतश्रमः in spite of all my efforts, राक्षसराजानम् king of rakshasas, रावणम् Ravana, बद्ध्वा  bind, आनयिष्यामि will bring. 
5::1::39::अहम् I, सर्वथा by all means, कृतकार्यः doing my duty successfully, सह सीतया along with Sita, एष्यामि I will come, वा or, सरावणाम् along with Ravana, लङ्काम् Lanka, समुत्पाट्य  after uprooting, आनयिष्यामि will bring. 
5::1::40::वानरोत्तमः foremost vanara, हनुमान् Hanuman, वानरान् to vanaras, एवम् that way, उक्त्वा having said, अथ then, अविचारयन् without any exertion, वेगवान् swift, वेगेन speedily, उत्पपात leaped, सः he, कपिकुञ्जरः best of vanaras, elephantlike, आत्मानम् himself, सुपर्णमिव like bird Suparna (Garuda), मेने he felt. 
5::1::41::तस्मिन् when he, समुत्पतति was leaping, वेगात् swiftly, ते they, नगरोहिणः numerous trees, सर्वान् all the, विटपान् branches, संहृत्य drawing together, समन्ततः from all over, समुत्पेतुः flew. 
5::1::42::सः he, मत्तकोयष्टिमकान् lapwings in heat, पुष्पशालिनः full of flowers, पादपान् trees, ऊरुवेगेन by the speed of his thighs, उद्वहन् while coursing, विमले  pristine (cloudless), अम्बरे in the sky, जगाम went.
5::1::43::ऊरुवेगोद्धताः bent forward by the force of his thighs, वृक्षाः trees, दीर्घम् long, अध्वानम् path, प्रस्थितम् starting, स्वबन्धुम् one's kith and kin, बान्धवाः इव like the relatives, कपिम् Hanuman, मुहूर्तम् for a while, अन्वयुः followed. 
5::1::44::ऊरुवेगोन्मथिताः uprooted by the speed of thighs, सालाश्च sala trees also, अन्ये other, नगोत्तमाः great trees, सैन्याः troops, महीपतिम् इव like the king, हनूमन्तम् Hanuman, अनुजग्मुः follow.
5::1::45:: बहुभिः by many, सुपुष्पिताग्रैः with blossomed tops, पादपैः with trees, अन्वित: endowed with, कपिः vanaras, पर्वताकारः mountain like, हनुमान् Hanuman, अद्भुतदर्शनः queer appearance, बभूव became. 
5::1::46::अथ and then, सारवन्तः huge, ये those, वृक्षाः trees, महेन्द्रस्य Indra's, भयात् out of fear, पर्वताः mountains, वरुणालये इव like the abode of Varuna, ocean, लवणाम्भसि in the salt sea, न्यमज्जन् sank.
5::1::47:: साङ्कुरकोरकैः with sprouts and buds, नानाकुसुमैः with different kinds of flowers, कीर्णः spread over, मेघसङ्काशः resembling a cloud, सः कपिः that Hanuman, खद्योतैः covered with fireflies, पर्वतः इव like a mountain, शुशुभे was shining brightly.  
5::1::48:: तस्य his, वेगेन speed, विमुक्ताः released, ते द्रुमाः those trees, पुष्पाणि flowers, मुक्त्वा  having dropped, निवृत्ताः returning, सुहृदो यथा like friends, सलिले water, अवशीर्यन्त fallen into water. 
5::1::49:: लघुत्वेन being light, उपपन्नम् risen up, विचित्रम् colourful, कपिवायुसमीरितम् driven by the wind caused by the speed of Hanuman, द्रुमाणाम् of the trees, तत् there, विविधम् various, पुष्पम् flowers, सागरे in the ocean, अपतत् fell, महार्णवः ocean, ताराचितम् filled with stars, आकाशमिव like the sky, प्रबभौ सः glowing.
5::1::50:: नानावर्णेन of different colours, अनुबद्धेन stuck, पुष्पौघेण by the blossoms, वानरः monkey (Hanuman), आकाशे in the sky, विद्युद्गणविभूषितः glowing like lightning, मेघः इव like the cloud, बभौ looked. 
5::1::51:: तस्य his, वेगसमाधूतैः dropped by the speed, पुष्पैः with flowers, तोयम् water, उदिताभिः rising ones, अभिरामाभिः by the very enchanting, ताराभिः by stars, अम्बरमिव like the sky, अदृश्यत appeared.
5::1::52::प्रसारितौ stretched out, अम्बरगतौ spread in the sky, तस्य his, बाहू two arms, पर्वताग्रात् from the top of the mountain, विनिष्क्रान्तौ emerging, पञ्चास्यौ fivehooded, पन्नगौ इव like snakes, ददृशाते looked. 
5::1::53:: सः that, महाकपिः great vanara, सोर्मिमालम् with its rising waves, महार्णवम् ocean, पिबन्निव as if gulping, बभौ looked, आकाशम् sky, च and , अपि also, पिपासुरिव as if thirsty, ददृशे looked. 
5::1::54::वायुमार्गानुसारिणः of him following the direction of the wind, तस्य his, विद्युत्प्रभाकारे both appearing like the glow of lightning, नयने  eyes, पर्वतस्थौ on the mountain, अनलौ इव like two fires, विप्रकाशेते very glittering. 
5::1::55::पिङ्गाक्षमुख्यस्य of the leader of monkeys, पिङ्गे reddishbrown, बृहती large, परिमण्डले round in shape, चक्षुषी eyes, उदितौ risen, चन्द्रसूर्याविव like Moon and Sun, सम्प्रकाशेते were shining. 
5::1::56:: तस्य his, ताम्रम् copperred, मुखम् face, ताम्रया by the red colour, नासिकया of the nose, सन्ध्यया by twilight, समभिस्पृष्टम् coming close, तत् that, सूर्यमण्डलं यथा like the Sun's orb, आबभौ appeared. 
5::1::57::अम्बरे in the sky, प्लवमानस्य when he was flying, वायुपुत्रस्य of the son of the Windgod, समाविद्धम् installed, लाङ्गूलम् tail, उच्छ्रितं lifted up (in the air), शक्रध्वजः इव like the flag staff of Indra, शोभते looks splendid.
5::1::58::शुक्लदंष्ट्रः whiteteethed, महाप्राज्ञः very wise, महान् great, अनिलात्मजः son of the Windgod, लाङ्गूलचक्रेण  curled up tail, परिवेषी surrounded, भास्करः इव like the Sun, व्यरोचत halo 
5::1::59::सः महाकपिः that great vanara, अभिताम्रेण with red one, स्फिग्देशेन with his buttocks, दारितेन इव as if split, महता by huge, गैरिकधातुना deposit of minerals, गिरिः इव like mountain, रराज shone.
5::1::60:: सागरम् ocean, प्लवमानस्य while he was crossing, तस्य his, वानरसिंहस्य lion like vanara, कक्षान्तरगतः through the armpits, वायुः wind, जीमूतः इव like thundering cloud, गर्जति roared. 
5::1::61::उत्तरान्तात् from the northern part, विनिःसृता released, सानुबन्धा च follows, उल्का a meteor, खे in the sky, यथा like, दृश्यते was seen, सः that, कपिकुञ्जरः elephant like vanara, तथा so, निपतति falling. . 
5::1::62:: पतत्पतङ्गसङ्काशः resembled the setting Sun, व्यायतः broad, कपिः monkey (Hanuman), बध्यमानया bound with, कक्ष्यया with the girth, प्रवृद्धः expanded to an enormous size, मातङ्गः इव elephant like, शुशुभे appeared. 
5::1::63:: तदा then, कपि: vanara, उपरिष्टात् the top, शरीरेण with his body, सागरे in the ocean, अवगाढया reflected, छायया च  shadow also, मारुताविष्टा swept by the wind, नौरिव like the ship, आसीत् appeared. 
5::1::64:: सः that, महाकपिः great vanara, समुद्रस्य of the ocean, यं यं देशं to whichever place, जगाम went, सः सः those, तस्य his, ऊरुवेगेन by the speed of his thighs, सोन्मादः इव riotous with eddies, whirlpools and revolving foam etc.like, लक्ष्यते was seen.  
5::1::65:: महावेगः very swift, सः that, महाकपिः great vanara, शैलवर्ष्मणाम् as mountains, सागरस्य of the ocean, ऊर्मिजालानाम् the rows of waves, उरसा by his chest, अभिघ्नन् while dashing against, पुप्लुवे flew.
5::1::66:: बलवान् forceful, कपिवातश्च wind generated by the swift movement of the monkey, निःसृतः rushing towards, मेघवातश्च and the wind of the clouds, भीम निर्घोषम् creating dreadful sounds, सागरम् ocean, भृशम् violently, कम्पयामासतुः both started agitating.
5::1::67:: कपिशार्दूलः a tiger among vanaras, लवणाम्भसि the saltwater ocean, बृहन्ति many, ऊर्मिजालानि mighty waves of the ocean, विकर्षन् pulling across, रोदसी the intermediary space (अन्तरिक्ष), विकिरन्निव drawing and dividing the earth and sky like, पुप्लुवे leaped forward.
5::1::68::महावेगः one who is of high speed, महार्णवे in the ocean, उद्धतान् risen, मेरुमन्दरसङ्काशान् resembling mountain Meru and Mandara, तरङ्गान् waves, गणयन्निव as if counting, सः that, अत्यक्रामत् crossed.
5::1::69::तदा then, तस्य his, वेगसमुद्धूतम् raised by his onrush, सजलदम् along with the cloud, जलम् water, अम्बरस्थम् found in the sky, आततम् stretched, शारदाभ्रमिव like the autumnal clouds, विबभ्राज shone. 
5::1::70::तदा then, तिमिनक्रझषाः whales, crocodiles and fish, कूर्माः tortoises, वस्त्रापकर्षणेन clothes put off, शरीरिणाम् of the bodies, शरीराणीव limbs of the body, विवृताः exposed, दृश्यन्ते appeared. 
5::1::71::अथ and then, व्योम्नि in the sky, प्लवमानम् coursing through, तं कपिशार्दूलम् that tiger among vanaras, समीक्ष्य seeing, सागरालयाः those in the abode of the sea, भुजङ्गाः serpents, सुपर्णः इति to be Garuda, मेनिरे thought.  
5::1::72::दशयोजनविस्तीर्णा spread over ten yojanas in breadth, त्रिंशद्योजनम् thirty yojanas, आयता long, वानरसिंहस्य of the lion among monkeys, छाया shadow, जले in water, चारुतरा more pleasing, अभवत् looked. 
5::1::73::वायुपुत्रानुगामिनी following the Windgod's son, लवणाम्भसि in the salty sea, वितता spread out, तस्य his, सा that, छाया shadow, श्वेताभ्रघनराजीव like dark row of clouds sailing in the pristine sky, शुशुभे shone. 
5::1::74::महातेजाः splendid, महाकायः one with a huge body, सः he, महाकपिः great vanara, निरालम्बे without any support, वायुमार्गे in the direction of the wind, पक्षवान् having wings, पर्वतः इव like a mountain, शुशुभे seemed. 
5::1::75:: बलवान् powerful, असौ he, कपिकुञ्जरः an elephant among monkeys, वेगेन swiftly, येन मार्गेण the path, याति proceeding, तेन by that, सहसा instantly, अर्णवः the sea, द्रोणीकृतः इव like a valley betwen two mountains.
5::1::76:: हनुमान् Hanuman, मारुतो यथा like the wind, मेघजालानि strings of clouds, प्रकर्षन् while attracting, पक्षिसङ्घानाम् of the group of birds, आपाते when landed, व्रजन् while moving, पक्षिराजः इव like the king of birds.
5::1::77:: कपिना by the vanara, आकृष्यमाणानि drawing, पाण्डुरारुणवर्णानि white and red colour, नीलमाञ्जिष्ठकानि च blue and yellow clouds, महाभ्राणि big clouds, चकाशिरे shining. 
5::1::78::अभ्रजालानि strings of clouds, पुनः पुनः again and again, प्रविशन् while entering, निष्पतंश्च and while coming out, प्रच्छन्नश्च hiding, प्रकाशश्च and shining, चन्द्रमाः इव like the Moon, लक्ष्यते was seen.
5::1::79::तदा then, त्वरितम् quickly, प्लवमानम् crossing, तं प्लवङ्गम् that monkey, दृष्ट्वा after seeing, देवगन्धर्वदानवाः deva, gandharvas and danavas, पुष्पवर्षाणि rain of flowers, ववर्षुः rained. 
5::1::80::तदा then, प्लवन्तम् while he was leaping, तं वानरोत्तमम् that best of vanaras, सूर्यः Sun, रामकार्यार्थसिद्धये for accomplishing Rama's task, न हि तताप  did not discharge heat, वायुः च and even wind, सिषेवे served cool. 
5::1::81:: विहायसा in the sky, प्लवमानम् while he leaped, महौजसम् a highly vigourous one, ऋषयः ascetics, तुष्टुवुश्चैनं extolled him, देवगन्धर्वाः gods and gandharvas, प्रशंसन्तः while prasing him, जगुश्च also sang.  
5::1::82::विगतक्लमम् unwearied, कपिवरम् the great monkey, प्रेक्ष्य observing, सहसा at once, नागाश्च nagas, यक्षाः yakshas, रक्षांसि rakshasas (who were protecting the southwest), विबुधाः learned sages, खगाः birds, सर्वे all, तुष्टुवुः praised . 
5::1::83:: प्लवगशार्दूले when the tiger among vanaras, तस्मिन् हनूमति when that monkeychief, प्लवमाने while leaping, सागरः the Seagod, इक्ष्वाकुकुलमानार्थी wishing the wellbeing and honour of the Ikshvaku family, चिन्तयामास started thinking. 
5::1::84:: अहम् I, वानरेन्द्रस्य of the chief of monkeys, हनूमतः Hanuman's, साहाय्यम् help, न करिष्यामि यदि if I do not render, विवक्षताम् by all the wise speakers, सर्ववाच्यः will be  blamed, भविष्यामि I will be. 
5::1::85:: अहम् I, इक्ष्वाकुनाथेन by the scion of the Ikshvakus, सगरेण by Sagara, विवर्धितः made to extend , इक्ष्वाकुसचिवः च and the minister of Ikshvaku race, अयम् this person, अवसीदितुम् to perish, नार्हति he shouldl not. 
5::1::86:: कपिः monkey, यथा likewise, विश्रमेत he may take rest, तथा in that way, मया by myself, विधातव्यम् arrangement has to be made, मयि on me, विश्रान्तः the rest, शेषम् remaining, सुखेन comfortably, अतिपतिष्यति will leap over. 
5::1::87:: समुद्रः the Seagod, इति thus, साध्वीं well, मतिम् in his mind, कृत्वा after resolving, अम्भसि in waters, छन्नम् hidden, हिरण्यनाभम् golden, गिरिसत्तमम् noble mountain, मैनाकम् to Mainaka, उवाच said. 
5::1::88::गिरिश्रेष्ठ O foremost mountain, त्वम् you, इह here, पातालतलवासिनाम् for those residing in the nether world, असुरसङ्घानाम् of hordes of demons, परिघः beam used as a barrier against the gateway, देवराज्ञा by the lord of the gods, सन्निवेशितः arranged.
5::1::89::जातवीर्याणाम् of the violent, एषाम् for these, पुनरेव again, उत्पतिष्यताम् prone to come up, त्वम् you, अप्रमेयस्य of the immeasurable, पातालस्य nether world's, द्वारम् entrance, आवृत्य  blocking, तिष्ठसि are staying. 
5::1::90::शैल O mountain, तिर्यक् across, ऊर्ध्वम् upward, अधश्चैव and at the bottom, वर्धितुम् to grow, ते to you, शक्तिः energy, गिरिसत्तम O noble mountain, तस्मात् therefore, त्वाम् you, सञ्चोदयामि I am prompting, उत्तिष्ठ you mary rise. 
5::1::91::कपिशार्दूलः a tiger among monkeys, वीर्यवान् valiant one, भीमकर्मा a performer of dreadful deeds, सः एषः that great personality, हनूमान् Hanuman, रामकार्यार्थम् on account of Rama's work, खम् in the sky, आप्लुतः flew, त्वाम् you उपरि over, एति you 
5::1::92::अस्य to him, इक्ष्वाकुकुलवर्तिनः for him who serves the Ikshvaku race, मया by me, साह्यम् help, कार्यम् should be given, मम to myself, इक्ष्वाकवः the kings of the Ikshvaku race, पूज्याः worthy of adoration, तव  to you, पूज्यतमाः most adorable .
5::1::93::अस्माकम् for us, साचिव्यम् counselling (the duty of a minister), कुरु you may do, नः for us, कार्यम् task, न अतिक्रमेत् may not be lost, कर्तव्यम् our duty, कार्यम्  task, अकृतम् not carried out, सताम् for pious men, मन्युम् anger, उदीरयेत् will cause. 
5::1::94::सलिलात् from the waters, ऊर्ध्वम् above, उत्तिष्ठ rise, अस्माकम् for us, अतिथिश्चैव guest also, पूज्यश्च worthy of worship also, प्लवताम् among the jumping ones, वरः noble, एषः कपिः this monkey, त्वयि on you, तिष्ठतु let him rest.  
5::1::95::चामीकरमहानाभ O goldenpeaked one, देवगन्धर्व सेवित resorted to by gods,  gandharvas, हनुमान् Hanuman, त्वयि by you, विश्रान्तः resting, ततः then, शेषम् remaing part, गमिष्यति will cover.
5::1::96:: काकुत्स्थस्य Rama's, अनृशंस्यं च good nature, मैथिल्याः Sita's, विवासनं च deportation, प्लवगेन्द्रस्य Hanuman's, श्रमं च strain also, समीक्ष्य considering, उत्थातुम् to rise up, अर्हसि you ought to. 
5::1::97::हिरण्यनाभः mountain with gold at its bosom, मैनाकः Mainaka, लवणाम्भसः of the salty ocean, निशम्य after listening, महाद्रुमलतायुतः with great trees and creepers, तूर्णम् at once, जलात् from the water, उत्पपात  rose up. 
5::1::98::तदा then, सः that mountain, सागरजलम् waters of the ocean, भित्त्वा projecting, दीप्तरमशिः the lord of glowing rays, दिवाकरः Sun, जलधरम् a cloud, भित्त्वा breaking, यथा as, अभ्युत्थितः rose up, बभूव appeared.  
5::1::99::सकिन्नरमहोरगैः with nagas and kinnaras, आदित्योदयसङ्काशैः resembling the rising Sun, सर्वतः all over, सलिलावृत: submerged by water, अम्बरम् sky, आलिखद्भि: as if scraping the sky, इव like that, शातकुम्भमयैः golden, शृङ्गैः with peak, सर्वतः all over, सलिलावृतः covered with water, सः महात्मा the great mountain, सागरेण the ocean's, नियोजितः ordered, मुहूर्तेन in a moment, शृङ्गाणि mountain peak, दर्शयामास was seen. 
5::1::100::समुत्थितैः by those risen ones, तप्तजाम्बूनदैः by barnished gold, पर्वतस्य mountain's, शृङ्गैः with peaks, शस्त्रसंकाशम् the colour of weapons, आकाशम् sky, काञ्चनप्रभम्, golden, अभवत् appeared.
5::1::101:: स्वयंप्रभैः the selfeffulgent ones, भ्राजमानैः glittering , जातरूपमयैः  golden, शृङ्गैः by the peak, सः that, गिरिसत्तमः noble mountain, आदित्यशतसङ्काशः like a thousand Suns, अभवत् appeared.
5::1::102::लवणतोयस्य of the seawater, मध्ये in the midst, असङ्गेन impediment across, उत्थितम् rising up, अग्रतः in front, स्थितम् stood, तम् him, हनुमान् Hanuman, अयम् this, विघ्नः obstruction, इति thus, निश्चितः surely.
5::1::103::महावेगः swift in action, सः महाकपिः that great vanara, अत्यर्थम् instantly, उच्छ्रितम् risen, तम् him, मारुतः the wind, जीमूतमिव like a cloud, उरसा with the chest, पातयामास pushed it down.
5::1::104::तेन कपिना by that vanara, तथा in that way, पातितः felled down, स पर्वतोत्तमः that high mountain, तस्य कपेः by the vanara's, वेगम् speed, बुद्ध्वा after realising, जहर्ष च felt happy, ननन्द च and roared in high pitch. 
5::1::105::पर्वतः mountain, प्रीतः feeling happy, हृष्टमानाः gladly, मानुषम् human, रूपम् form, धारयन् assuming, आत्मनः his, शिखरे on the summit, स्थितः standing, आकाशगतम् gone to the aerial region, तं वीरं कपिम् that heroic vanara, आकाशे in the sky, समुपस्थितः  stood, वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
5::1::106::वानरोत्तम O best of the vanaras, त्वम् you, दुष्करम् formidable, इदम् this, कर्म deed, कृतवान्  accomplished, मम my, शृङ्गेषु on this peak, निपत्य alighting, यथासुखम् comfortably, विश्रमस्व you may rest. 
5::1::107:: उदधिः the ocean, राघवस्य of Raghava's, कुले in the family, जातैः by those born, परिवर्धितः is extended, सः सागरः that Sagara, रामहिते for the service of Rama, युक्तम् endowed with, त्वाम् you, प्रत्यर्चयति honour in return.
5::1::108::कृते when help is rendered, प्रतिकर्तव्यम्  it should be repaid, एषः this, सनातनः eternal, धर्मः dharma, तत्प्रतिकारार्थी for doing service in return, सः अयम् this, त्वत्तः from you, सम्मानम् honour, अर्हति he deserves.
5::1::109::योजनानां शतम् a hundred yojanas, समाप्लुतः is leaping, एषः this, कपिः vanara, तव your, सानुषु on the peaks, विश्रान्तः resting, शेषम् remaining, प्रक्रमताम proceed thereafter, इति thus, अनेन by this ocean, त्वन्निमित्तम for your sake, अहम् I, बहुमानात् with honour, प्रचोदितः prompted, कपिशार्दूल: a tiger among monkeys, त्वम् you, तिष्ठ stay, मयि at my, विश्रम्य after resting, गम्यताम् you can go. 
5::1::110::हरिश्रेष्ठ O foremost of the monkeys, तत् इदम् such as this, गन्धवत् sweet smelling, स्वादु tasty, बहु plenty, कन्दमूलफलम् roots and fruits, इदम् this, तत् that, आस्वद्य after tasting, विश्रान्तः taking rest, अनु later, गमिष्यसि you may go. 
5::1::111::कपिमुख्य O chief of monkeys, त्रिषु in the three, लोकेषु in the worlds, प्रख्यातः wellknown, महागुणपरिग्रहः possesing great merits, सम्बन्धः kinship, त्वया with you, अस्माकमपि for us also, अस्ति वै  is there.
5::1::112:: मारुतात्मज O son of the Windgod, कपिकुञ्जर O elephant among monkeys, वेगवन्तः  swift, प्लवन्तः jumping, ये those, प्लवगाः vanaras, तेषाम् of them, मुख्यतमम् the foremost, त्वाम् you, अहम् I, मन्ये believe. 
5::1::113::धर्मम् righteousness, जिज्ञासमानेन  who desires to know, विजानता by a wise man, प्राकृतोऽपि even an ordinary person, अतिथिः a guest, पूजार्हः worthy of worship, त्वादृशः a person like you, महान् great, किं पुनः what again, किल it is  said.
5::1::114::कपिकुञ्जर foremost among vanaras, त्वम् you, देववरिष्ठस्य of the pre eminent one among the divine beings, महात्मनः of the highsouled, मारुतस्य wind god's, पुत्रः हि son indeed, वेगेन in speed, तस्यैव with his own self, सदृशः comparable. 
5::1::115::धर्मज्ञ O knower of righteousness, त्वयि when you, पूजिते if you are worshipped, मारुतः Windgod, पूजाम् veneration, प्राप्नोति will recieve, तस्मात् therefore, त्वम् you, अपि also, मे to me, पूजनीयः worshipworthy, अत्र here, कारणं च also the cause, शृणु listen.
5::1::116::तात O dear son, पूर्वम् formerly, कृतयुगे in Krita yuga, पर्वताः mountains,पक्षिणः had wings, अभवन् endowed, ते  they, गरुडानिलवेगिनः swift like Garuda and wind, सर्वाः all, दिशः directions, जग्मुः went about.
5::1::117::ततः then, तेषु when they, प्रयातेषु went about, सहर्षिभिः and sages, देवसङ्घा: hosts of gods, भूतानि च and all creatures, तेषाम् their, पतनशङ्कया out of fear of their falling down, भयम् fear, जग्मुः felt.
5::1::118::ततः then, शतक्रतुः one who has performed a hundred yajnas, सहस्राक्षः Indra, क्रुद्धः in anger, तत्र तत्र here and there, सहस्रशः in thousand, पर्वतानाम् of the mountains, पक्षान् wings, वज्रेण with the thunderbolt, चिच्छेद cut into pieces. 
5::1::119:: सः he, देवराट् Indra, क्रुद्धः in wrath, वज्रम् thunderbolt, उद्यम्य held, माम् to me, उपागतः came, ततः then, अहम् I, महात्मना by the great self, श्वसनेन by the Windgod, सहसा at once, क्षिप्तः dropped down.
5::1::120::प्लवगोत्तम O distinguished among the vanaras, गुप्तपक्षसमग्रश्च kept my wings intact, अस्मिन् in this, लवणतोये in the salt waters of the sea, प्रक्षिप्तः thrown down, तव पित्रा by your father, अभिरक्षितः protected.
5::1::121::कपिमुख्य O esteemed vanara, मारुतः Windgod, मम my, मान्यः हि revered one, ततः therefore, अहम् I, त्वाम् you, मानयामि I will honour you, त्वया by you, मे to me, एषः this, सम्बन्धः relationship, महागुणः is great.
5::1::122::महाकपे O great monkey, अस्मिन् in this, कार्ये  work, एवंगते reached such a position, त्वम् you, प्रीतमनाः wholeheartedly, सागरस्य च and the ocean's, ममैव च and mine also, प्रीतिम् pleasure, कर्तुम् to do, अर्हसि you ought to.
5::1::123::कपिसत्तम O noble monkey, श्रमम् fatigue, मोक्ष्य after being relieved, पूजां  च and offerings, गृहाण accept, प्रीतिम् love, बहुमन्यस्व oblige us, तव your, दर्शनात् by your presence, प्रीतः अस्मि I am pleased.
5::1::124::एवम् in that way, उक्तः having addressed, कपिश्रेष्ठः the great monkey, तं नगोत्तमम् to the lord of mountains, अब्रवीत् said, प्रीतः pleased, अस्मि I am, आतिथ्यम् hospitality, कृतम् is offered, एषः this, मन्युः unhappiness, अपनीयताम् remove.
5::1::125::मे to me, कार्यकालः schedule, त्वरते hastens, अहः च the day also, अतिवर्तते exceeds, मया by me, प्रतिज्ञा vow, दत्ता च is made, अन्तरे in between, इह here, न स्थातव्यम् I will not halt.
5::1::126:: वीर्यवान् heroic, हरिपुङ्गवः chief of monkeys, इति thus, उक्त्वा having spoken, शैलम् the mountain, पाणिना with his hand, आलभ्य gently touching, आकाशम् to the sky, आविश्य ascended, प्रहसन्निव with a smile on his face, जगाम departed.
5::1::127:: सः he, अनिलात्मजः son of the Windgod, पर्वतसमुद्राभ्याम् by both the mountain and ocean, बहुमानात् with great respect, आवेक्षितः was adored, उपपन्नाभिः with proper ones, आशीर्भिः with blessings, पूजितः च also honoured.
5::1::128::अथ then, शैलमहार्णवौ the mountain and the ocean, हित्वा after leaving, ऊर्ध्वम् high, दूरम् long distance, उत्प्लुत्य leaping into, विमले in the clear, अम्बरे in sky, पितुः father's, पन्थानम् the path, आस्थाय after taking, जगाम went.
5::1::129::वायुसूनुः son of the Windgod, भूयः च further, ऊर्ध्वम् high up, गतिम् path, प्राप्य taking, तं गिरिम् the mountain, अवलोकयन् while looking at, निरालम्बे in a place without any support, विमले pure, cloudless, अम्बरे in the sky, जगाम went.
5::1::130::हनुमतः of Hanuman, तत् that, सुदुष्करम् most difficult, द्वितीयम् a second, कर्म task, दृष्ट्वा on seeing, सर्वे all, सुराः gods, सिद्धाश्च siddhas, परमर्षयः great sages, प्रशंशसुः praised him.
5::1::131::तत्रस्थाः those who were there, देवताश्च gods, सहस्राक्षः the thousandeyed, वासवश्च Indra, काञ्चनस्य of the golden Mainaka, तस्य his, सुनाभस्य of Sunabha, कर्मणा by the task, हृष्टाः delighted, अभवन् became.
5::1::132::धीमान् wise, शचीपतिः husband of Sachi, Indra, पर्वतश्रेष्ठम् best mountain, सुनाभम् Sunabha, परितोषात् satisfied, सगद्गदम् with throat choked, स्वयमेव himself, वचनम् these words, उवाच spoke.
5::1::133::हिरण्यनाभ O Hiranyanabha, शैलेन्द्र O lord of mountains, ते with you, भृशम् a lot, परितुष्टः अस्मि I am pleased, सौम्य O pious one, ते to you, अभयम् security, प्रयच्छामि I give, यथासुखम् happily as you please, तिष्ठ you may stay on.
5::1::134::विक्रान्तस्य of one attempting to leap, योजनशतम् a hundred yojanas, क्रमतः while  leaping, भये सति when there is reason to fear, निर्भयस्य of a fearless one, हनूमतः Hanuman, ते by you, सुमहत् very valuable, साह्यम् help, कृतम् rendered. 
5::1::135::एषः हरिः this vanara, दाशरथेः of the son of Dasaratha, रामस्य Rama's, पितायैव for his wellbeing only, याति  going, तस्य his, सत्क्रियाम् honour, कुर्वता for doing, त्वया by you, दृढम् surely, तोषितः अस्मि I am pleased.
5::1::136::तत: thereafter, पर्वतोत्तमः the best of mountains, देवतानाम् of gods,पतिम् lord, शतक्रतुम् who had performed a hundred yajnas, Indra, परितुष्टम् extremely happy,दृष्ट्वा after seeing, विपुलम् very much, प्रहर्षम् delight, आगमत् experienced.
5::1::137::तदा then, दत्तवरः who received a boon, सः he, शैलः Mainaka, अवस्थितः he became stable, बभूव became, हनुमांश्च Hanuma also, मुहूर्तेन in a short while, सागरम् ocean, व्यतिचक्राम crossed over. 
5::1::138::ततः then, सगन्धर्वाः including gandharvas, देवाः gods, सिद्धाश्च and siddhas, परमर्षयः great sages, सूर्यसङ्काशाम् shining like the Sun, नागमातरम् mother of nagas, सुरसाम् Surasa, अब्रुवन् said.
5::1::139::हनुमन्नाम named Hanuman, श्रीमान् glorious, अयं this person, वातात्मजः son of the Windgod, सागरोपरि over the sea, प्लवते is flying, त्वम् you, सुघोरम् hideous, पर्वतोपमम् gigantic like a mountain, राक्षसम् demoniac, रूपम् form, आस्थाय assuming, दंष्ट्राकरालम् with big teeth, पिङ्गाक्षम्  yellowbrown eyes, नभः समम् like the sky, वक्त्रम् mouth, कृत्वा doing, मुहूर्तम् for a short while, तस्य him, विघ्नम् obstruction, आचर make.
5::1::140::अस्य his, बलम् strength, भूयः once again, पराक्रमं च and valour, उपायेन intelligence त्वाम्  you, विजेष्यति he will win, वा or else, विषादम् dejected, गमिष्यति will give way, ज्ञातुम् to know, इच्छामहे we wish.
5::1::141::देवी the divine being, सा सुरसा Surasa, दैवतैः by gods, एवम् that way, उक्ता having been addressed, अभिसत्कृता received their honour, समुद्र मध्ये in the midst of the ocean, विकृतम् terrific, विरूपं च ugly form, सर्वस्य for all, भयावहम् frightening, राक्षसं वपुः demoniac form, बिभ्रती  put up, प्लवमानम् leaping, हनूमन्तम् Hanuman, आवृत्य after encirding him, इदम् these words, उवाच ह said.
5::1::142::वानरर्षभ O bull among, त्वम् you, ईश्वरैः by lords of the universe, मम to me, भक्षः food, प्रदिष्टः are provided, अहम् I, त्वाम् you, भक्षयिष्यामि I will eat you, इदम् this, मम my, आननम् mouth, प्रविश enter.
5::1::143::सुरसया by Surasa,एवम् In that way, उक्तः spoken, श्रीमान् glorious, वानरर्षभः वहतत bull among vanaras, प्रहृष्टवदनः with a blooming face, प्राञ्जलिः with folded hands, इदं वचनम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
5::1::144::दाशरथिः Dasaratha's son, रामो नाम called Rama, भ्रात्रा with his brother, लक्ष्मणेन सह accompanied by Lakshmana, भार्यया with his wife, वैदेह्या चापि with Vaidehi also, दण्डकावनम् Dandaka forest, प्रविष्टः entered.
5::1::145::राक्षसैः with rakshasas, बद्धवैरस्य  deeprooted enmity, तस्य his, अन्यकार्यविषक्तस्य while he was engaged in some other work, यशस्विनी a glorious lady, भार्या wife, सीता Sita, रावणेन by Ravana, हृता was abducted. 
5::1::146:: अहम् I, रामशासनात् by Rama's command, दूतः emissary, तस्याः her, सकाशम् for, गमिष्ये I shall go, विषयवासिनि O resident of his kingdom, रामस्य of Rama, साह्यम् help, कर्तुम् to render, अर्हसि it proper for you.
5::1::147::अथवा alternatively, मैथिलीम् Mythili, अक्लिष्टकारिणम् one who may makes work easy (without any trouble), रामं च and Rama, दृष्ट्वा after seeing, ते to your, वक्त्रम् mouth, आगमिष्यामि I will reach, सत्यम् truly, ते you, प्रतिशृणोमि I promise.
5::1::148::हनुमता by Hanuman, एवम् in that way, उक्ता having been spoken, कामरूपिणी one who can assume any form at free will, सुरसा Surasa, अब्रवीत् said, कश्चित् no one, नातिवर्तेत cannot cross, एषः such, मम to me, वरः boon.
5::1::149:: नागमाता mother of serpents, सुरसा Surasa, हनूमतः of Hanuman, बलम् strength, जिज्ञासमाना वै desirous of knowing, प्रयान्तम् who was attempting to go away, तम् her, समुद्वीक्ष्य observing, वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवीत् said. 
5::1::150::वानरोत्तम O best of the vanaras, अद्य today, मे my, वदनम् face (mouth), प्रविश्य after entering, गन्तव्यम् you may go, एषः वरः such a boon, पुरा past, मम to me, धात्रा by Brahma, दत्तः is given, इति thus, सत्वरा quickly, विपुलम् wide, वक्त्रम् mouth, व्यादाय opened, सा she, मारुतेः vanara's, पुरः front, स्थिता stood.
5::1::151::सुरसया by Surasa, एवम् in that way, उक्तः having been spoken to, वानरपुङ्गवः supreme vanara, क्रुद्धः got angry, अब्रवीत् he said, वक्त्रम् mouth, कुरु वै open, येन in such a way, माम् me, विषहिष्यसे you can bear me.
5::1::152:: तदा then, हनुमान् Hanuman, सुरसां Surasa, इति thus, उक्त्वा having said, क्रुद्धः angry, दशयोजनम् ten yojanas, आयतां wide, दशयोजनविस्तारः ten yojanas in breadth, बभूव became.
5::1::153::दशयोजनम् ten yojanas, आयतम् wide, मेघसङ्काशम् like a cloud, तम् him, दृष्ट्वा after seeing, सुरसा च Surasa too, आस्यम् her mouth, विंशद्योजनम् twenty yojanas, आयतम् wide, चकार stretched.
5::1::154:: ततः then, हनुमांस्तु Hanuman also, क्रुद्धः in anger, त्रिंशद्योजनम् thirty yojanas, आयतः wide, सुरसा Surasa, तथा like that, वक्त्रम् mouth, चत्वारिंशम् forty yojanas, उच्छ्रितम् high, चकार did, वीरः hero, हनुमान् Hanuman, पञ्चाशद्योजनोच्छ्रितः fifty yojanas high, बभूव became.
5::1::155::सुरसा Surasa, वक्त्रम् mouth, षष्टियोजनम् sixty yojanas, आयतम् wide, चकार did, वीरः heroic, हनुमान् Hanuman, तथैव in the same way, सप्ततीयोजनोच्छ्रितः increased to seventy yojanas.
5::1::156::सुरसा Surasa, वक्त्रम् mouth, अशीतीयोजनायतम् eighty yojanas wide, चकार  made, अचलप्रख्यः like a mountain, हनुमान् Hanuman, नवतीयोजनोच्छ्रितः ninety yojanas.
5::1::157::सुबुद्धिमान् very intelligent, वायुपुत्रः Hanuman, सुरसया by Surasa, व्यादितम् opened, दीर्घजिह्वम् long tongued, सुघोरम् dreadful, नरकोपमम् like hell, तत् आस्यम् that mouth, दृष्ट्वा on seeing, आत्मनः his, कायम् body, सुसंक्षिप्य shrunk, अङ्गुष्ठमात्रकः of the size of a thumb, बभूव became.
5::1::158::श्रीमान् glorious one, महाबलः mighty, सः he, आशु immediatly, तद्वक्त्रम् her mouth, अभिपत्य got in, निष्पत्य च and got out, अन्तरिक्षे in the sky, स्थितः stood, इदम् this, वचनम् word, अब्रवीत् spoke.
5::1::159::दाक्षायणि O dughter of Daksha, ते your, वक्त्रम् mouth, प्रविष्टः I have entered, अस्मि हि I am indeed, ते to you, नमः salutations, अस्तु may be, वैदेही Vaidhehi, यत्र wherever, गमिष्ये I will go, तव your, वरः च boon also, सत्यम् true, आसीत् was.
5::1::160::राहुमुखात् from the mouth of Rahu, चन्द्रमिव like the Moon, वदनात् from the mouth, मुक्तम् released, तं him, वानरम् that vanara, दृष्ट्वा seeing, सुरसा देवी the divine Surasa, स्वेन in her true, रूपेण form, अब्रवीत् said.
5::1::161::सौम्य O noble one, हरिश्रेष्ठ O best of vanaras, अर्थसिद्ध्यै for achieving your purpose, यथासुखम् with pleasure, गच्छ proceed, वैदेहीम् Vaidehi, महात्मना with the great self, राघवेण with Raghava, समानयस्व unite.
5::1::162::सुदुष्करम् very difficult, हनुमतः of Hanuman, तत् that, तृतीयं कर्म a third feat, दृष्ट्वा after witnessing, तदा then, भूतानि  living beings, साधु साधु इति welldone, welldone this, हरिम् vanara, प्रशशंसुः applauded.
5::1::163::वेगेन speedily, गरुडोपमः like Garuda, सः he, अनाधृष्यम् invincible, वरुणालयम् abode of varuna, सागरम् ocean, अभ्येत्य piercing through, आकाशम् sky, आविश्य coursing, जगाम went.
5::1::164::वारिधाराभिः with clouds that release torrents, सेविते frequented by, पतगैश्च by birds, निषेविते inhabited by, कैशिकाचार्यैः by masters (Tumburu, Narada and Gandharvas) of music and dance (Kaisikaart and science of music), चरिते traversed by, ऐरावतनिषेविते attended by elephant Airabata (of Indra), सिंहकुञ्जरशार्दूलपतगोरगवाहनैः with aerial vehicles drawn by lions, elephants, tigers, birds and serpents, सम्पतद्भि:  driven by, विमलैः by clear, विमानैः by aerial vehicles, समलङ्कृते well decorated, वज्राशनिसमाघातैः by the god of fire who strike fiercely  like a thunderbolt, पावकैः by fires, उपशोभिते looking splendid, कृतपुण्यैः by those who have performed meritorious deeds, महाभागैः by accomplished people, स्वर्गजिद्भि: by those who conquered heaven, अलङ्कृते decorated, अत्यर्थम् greatly, हव्यम् havis,वहता carrying, चित्रभानुना by fire, सेविते attended by, ग्रहनक्षत्रचन्द्रार्कतारागणविभूषिते adorned with planets, Moon, Sun and stars constellations, महर्षिगणगन्धर्व नागयक्षसमाकुले filled with groups of  eminent sages gandharvas, nagas, yakshas, विविक्ते isolated region, विमले cloudless, विश्वे  by vishva, विश्वावसुनिषेविते inhabited by Vishvavasu, देवराजगजाक्रान्ते sporting ground for the elephant of Indra, चन्द्रसूर्यपथे in the path of Moon and Sun, शिवे an auspicious place, जीवलोकस्य for the living beings, ब्रह्मनिर्मिते created by Brahma, वितते  extensive, विताने canopy, वरैः by the esteemed, वीरैः by heroes, विद्याधरगणैः by Vidyadhara groups, बहुशः frequently, सेविते attended by, वायुमार्गे the path of wind, मारुतिः Hanuman, गरुत्मानिव like Garuda, जगाम went.
5::1::165::सर्वत्र all over, प्रदृश्यमानः he appeared, मारुतात्मजः son of Windgod, हनुमान् Hanuman, लम्बपक्षः longwinged, अद्रिराट् इव like king of mountains, निरालम्बम्  unsupported, अम्बरम् the sky, भेजे occupied.
5::1::166::कामरूपिणी who can take any form at will, सिंहिका नाम called Simhika, राक्षसी demoness, प्लवमानम् him who was speeding in the sky, तम् him, दृष्ट्वा after seeing, प्रवृद्धा expanded in size, चिन्तयामास started thinking.
5::1::167::चिरस्य after a long time, इदम् this, महत् great, सत्त्वम् being, मे my, वशम् fold, आगतम् has come, दीर्घस्य after a long, कालस्य time, अद्य today, अहम् I, आशिता satiated, भविष्यामि I will be.
5::1::168:: इति thus, मनसा in her mind, सञ्चिन्त्य after thinking, अस्य his, छायाम् shadow, समाक्षिपत् pulled, छायायाम् when his shadow, गृह्यमाणायाम् was held, वानरः vanara, चिन्तयामास deliberated.
5::1::169::सागरे in the ocean, प्रतिलोमेन from the opposite side, वातेन by the wind, महानौरिव like a huge ship, पङ्गूकृतपराक्रमः  powerless, सहसा  suddenly, समाक्षिप्तः caught, अस्मि I am.
5::1::170::ततः then, कपिः monkey, तिर्यक् horizontally, ऊर्द्वम् upward, अथश्चैव at the bottom level, वीक्षमाणः while looking at, लवणाम्भसि in the salt sea, उत्थितम् risen up, महत् huge, सत्त्वम् being, ददर्श saw.
5::1::171::मारुतिः Maruti, विकृताननम् hideous countenance, तत् that creature, दृष्ट्वा  seeing, चिन्तयामास reflected, कपिराजेन by the king of monkeys, कथितम् described, अद्भुतदर्शनम् of wonderful appearance, छायाग्राहि  which can hold the shadow, महावीर्यम् very powerful, तत् that, सत्त्वम् creature, इदम् this, अत्र here it is, संशयः doubt, न no.
5::1::172::मतिमान् wise one, सः कपिः Hanuman, ताम् her, अर्थतत्त्वेन by her true nature, सिंहिकाम् Simhika, बुद्ध्वा recognising, महाकायः huge bodied one, प्रावृषि in rainy season, वलाहकः इव like a cloud, व्यवर्धत grew.
5::1::173::सा she, तस्य महाकपेः Hanuman's, कायम् body, वर्धमानम् growing, उद्वीक्ष्य after observing, पातालान्तरसन्निभम् like the depth of the underworld, वक्त्रम् mouth, प्रसारयामास distended.
5::1::174::घनराजीव like a mass of heavy clouds, गर्जन्ती  roaring, वानरम् that vanara, समभिद्रवत् ran towards him, ततः then, मेधावी intelligent, महाकपिः Hanuman, तस्याः her, विवृतम् opened, कायमात्रम् body alone, सुमहत् enormous, मुखम् mouth, मर्माणि च vatal parts, सः he, ददर्श saw.
5::1::175::महाबलः strong one, वज्रसंहननः of thunderboltlike physique, सः कपिः that vanara, आत्मानम् himself, मुहुः once again, संक्षिप्य contracted, तस्याः her, विवृते open, वक्त्रे in the mouth, निष्पपात entered.
5::1::176::सिद्धचारणाः siddhas and charanas, तस्याः her, आस्ये in the mouth, निमज्जन्तम् drowning in, पर्वणि on fullmoon day, राहुणा by Rahu, ग्रस्यमानम् being seized, पूर्णम् full, चन्द्रं यथा like the Moon, ददृशुः saw.
5::1::177:: ततः thay, वानरः vanara, तीक्ष्णैः with sharp, नखैः with nails, तस्याः her, मर्माणि private vital parts, उत्कृत्य after tearing, अथ then, मनः सम्पातविक्रमः  with the speed of mind in action, वेगेन quickly, उत्पपात rushed out.
5::1::178:: आत्मवान् selfcontrolled, सः he, कपिप्रवरः great monkey, ताम् her, दृष्ट्वा च after seeing, धृत्या च with firmness of mind, दाक्षिण्येन with ingenuity, निपात्य thrown down, पुनः again, वेगात् rapidly, ववृधे grew in size.
5::1::179::सा that, हनुमता by Hanuman, हृतहृत्  heart torn, विधुरा  miserable, अम्भसि into water, पपात fell down, वानरेण by vanara, आशु instantly, हताम् killed, पतिताम् dropped, वीक्ष्य  seeing, आकाशाचारीणि  moving in the sky, भूतानि beings, तम् him, प्लवगोत्तमम् best of vanaras, ऊचुः addressed.
5::1::180::प्लवतां वर O great jumper, अद्य  to day, त्वया by you, महत्  great, सत्त्वम् creature, हतम् is destroyed, भीमम् fierce, कर्म action, कृतम् done, अभिप्रेतम् intention, अर्थम् aim, अरिष्टम् unobstructed, साधय you fulfill
5::1::181::वानरेन्द्र O lord of vanara, यस्य in whom, धृतिः fortitude, दृष्टिः vision, मतिः intelligence, दाक्ष्यम् dexterity, एतानि these, चत्वारि four, तव यथा as in you, स: he, कर्मसु in missions, न सीदति will not get lost. 
5::1::182::पूज्यः a venerable one, सः कपिः that monkey, तैः by them, सम्भावितः honoured, प्रतिपन्नप्रयोजनः achieved the objective, आकाशम् sky, आविश्य having ascended,      पन्नगाशानवत् like Garuda, जगाम went.
5::1::183::प्राप्तभूयिष्ठपारः on reaching the other side of the shore, सर्वतः all over, प्रतिलोकयन्  looked around, योजनानाम् of yojanas, शतस्य of a hundred, अन्ते at the end of, वनराजिम् rows of forest trees, ददर्श saw.
5::1::184:: शाखामृगश्रेष्ठः best among the animals that jump on branches, monkeys, पतन्नेन onwhile yet on air, विविधद्रुमभूषितम् adorned with several kinds of beautiful trees, द्वीपम् island, मलयोपवनानि gardens bordering Malaya mountain, ददर्श च also saw.
5::1::185::आत्मवान् selfcontrolled, मतिमान्  wise, सः he, सागरम् sea, सागरानूपम् marshy track bordering the sea, सागरानूपजान् grown in the region, द्रुमान् trees, सागरस्य ocean's, पत्नीनाम् consorts, मुखान्यपि च  mouths also, विलोकयन् while looking at, महामेघसङ्काशम् like a huge cloud, आकाशम् sky, निरुन्धन्तमिव as if obstructing, आत्मानम् his own body, समीक्ष्य after observing, मतिम् चकार thought.
5::1::186::मम my, कायवृद्धिम् increasing size of the body, प्रवेगं च and speed, दृष्ट्वैव after seeing, राक्षसाः demons, मयि at me, कौतूहलम् inquisitive, कुर्युः will have, इति this, महाकपिः great monkey, मेने felt.
5::1::187::ततः then, तत् that, महीधरसन्निभम् like a huge mountain, तत् that, शरीरम् body, संक्षिप्य having contracted, वीतमोहः giving up ignorance, आत्मवानिव like a sage, पुनः once again, प्रकृतिम् natural size, आपेदे assumed.
5::1::188::हनुमान् Hanuman, तत् that, रूपम् form, अतिसंक्षिप्य contracting to very small size, बलिवीर्यहरः just as Hari took small form to defeat king Bali, हरिः Lord Visnu, त्रीन् three, क्रमान् strides, विक्रम्य इव  overpowering the valour, प्रकृतौ his original form, स्थितः stood.
5::1::189::चारुनानाविधरूपधारी who can take diffrent lovely forms, परैः by others, अशक्यः not possible, सः he, परम् opposite side, समुद्रतीरम् sea shore, समासाद्य after reaching, समीक्षितात्मा gazing at his own self, प्रतिपन्नरूपः assumed a form suitable for the purpose, समवेक्षितार्थः considered.
5::1::190:: ततः then, महाद्रिकूटप्रतिमः top of the huge Trikuta mountain, सः he, महात्मा great self, लम्बस्य गिरेः on the mountain called Lamba, विचित्रकूटे on a mountain with wonderful, समृद्धे rich, सकेतकोद्दालकनालिकेरे in Kethaka Uddalaka, Panasa and Coconut trees, प्रतिमो descended, निपपात landed कूटे peak 
5::1::191::ततः then, कपिः तु vanara also, समुद्रतीरम् to sea shore, सम्प्राप्य after reaching, गिरिवर्यमूर्ध्नि located on the mountain peak, लङ्काम् Lanka, समीक्ष्य having observed, रूपम् form, विधूय shook, मृगद्विजान् beasts and birds, व्यथयन् scared, तस्मिन् on that, पर्वते on the mountain, निपपात landed.
5::1::192::सः he, दानवपन्नगायुतम् filled with demons and serpents, महोर्मिमालिनम् of garland of high waves, सागरम् ocean, बलेन by his process, विक्रम्य having crossed, महोदधेः  the great ocean, तीरे on the shore, निपत्य having landed, तदा then, अमरावतीमिव resembling Amaravati, लङ्काम् Lanka, ददर्श he saw.
