5::65::1::Thereafter the vanaras arrived at the Prasrvana mount, with wonderful forests and bowed down to Sri Rama and mighty Lakshaman and Sugriva placing their leader, heir apparent in front. Then they began telling the story of Sita and her state.
5::65::2::The monkeys in Rama's presence narrated all about Sita's detention in Ravana's Ashoka garden, the ogresses threatening her and the time limit fixed by Ravana (for her survival).
5::65::3::Hearing of Sita alive and not harmed, Rama asked the vanaras, 'How is Sita? How is she disposed to me? Tell me everything'.
5::65::4::On hearing the words from Rama, the vanaras requested Hanuman who was aware of  Sita's position to tell Rama all about her.
5::65::5::The son of the Wind god, Hanuman who was wise in speech heard the words of Rama, offered salutations to Sita in the direction in which she was located and narrated the story about her discovery.
5::65::6::Having crossed the sea consisting of a hundred yojanas in quest of Vaidehi, I found her.
5::65::7::On the southern shore of the ocean is situated the city of Lanka , ruled by the evilminded Ravana.
5::65::8::There in the inner palace of Ravana, I saw your lovely wife Sita, with all her hopes pinned on you, giving up all other desires.
5::65::9::I found her in the beautiful garden guarded by hideous ogresses threatening her again and again৷৷
5::65::10::Sita, who did not deserve and yet was full of grief was detained by Ravana in his inner palace, guarded by ogresses. She had single braid (a sign of desolation), was pathetic,  and totally absorbed in your thought. She was lying on bare ground with her limbs turned pale, like lotus in winter. She was averse to Ravana and was determined to commit suicide. She has only Rama in her mind. Somehow I found her.
5::65::11::O sinless one O tiger among men To inspire confidence in her I praised the glory of your Ikshvaku dynasty.
5::65::12::When the divine lady talked to me, I presented all the facts about the alliance of Rama and Sugriva. On hearing me, virtuous Sita, whose devotion is fixed on you became delighted.    
5::65::13::O bull among men I saw Janaki,the delight of Janaka, a formidable lady filled with devotion to you and richly endowed with austerity.
5::65::14::O wise one, with your ring given her, she told me an anecdote of a crow that took place at Chitrakuta.
5::65::15::(She said)'O son of the Windgod you should let Rama, the tiger among men know all that you have seen here.
5::65::16::'Within hearing of Sugriva, tell him about your efforts. Present this(signet) to Rama carefully preserved by me.
5::65::17::'This auspicious (jewel) Chudamani has been preserved by me very carefully. Remind him of the decorative red mark he painted with a stone pigment on my forehead, indeed, it is proper to remind him of this.
5::65::18::'O sinless one tell Rama that this auspicious Chudamani born in the ocean is sent to him and I was gazing at it as if it was him (Rama) and feeling happy.
5::65::19::'O Son of Dasaratha I will hold on to life for a month. Captured by the demons, I will not live for more than a month'.
5::65::20::With her limbs emaciated through austerities detained in Ravana's inner palace, eyes wide open in fear, Sita said this to me:
5::65::21::O Rama I have spoken everything that has happened. We have to pay attention to the means of crossing the ocean.
5::65::22::Coming to know that the two princes were sighing in relief, Hanuman presented the token of identification given by Sita to Rama, after having communicated in full the messsage of Sita in an orderly manner.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyfifth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
