5::51::1::Hanuman, the best of monkeys, looking at the very powerful Ravana spoke slowly  these highly meaningful words.
5::51::2::O lord of demons I reached your realm here by the orders of Sugriva, lord of monkeys who is like your brother. He conveys his good wishes to you.
5::51::3::The great Sugriva who is like your brother sends you a message pertinent to this world and the other world, that which is beneficial and consistent with righteousness and propriety (धर्म and अर्थ). Listen:
5::51::4::There was an emperor named Dasaratha richly endowed with chariots, horses and elephants. He was a friend to the world and was like a father and equal to Indra in splendour.
5::51::5::His eldest son, a highly effulgent one, named Rama who was dear to the king, accepting his father's orders went into exile with brother Lakshmana and wife Sita also accepting a righteous path and entered Dandaka forest.
5::51::6::Sita, daughter of king Janaka of Videha kingdom, loyally followed her husband, Rama. She was lost in the forest.  
5::51::7::Searching for the divine lady the prince reached mount Rshyamuka along with his brother and there he met Sugriva.
5::51::8::Sugriva promised Rama to undertake search for Sita and Rama assured Sugriva of securing him the kingdom of the monkeys. 
5::51::9::Then prince Rama killed Vali in battle and made Sugriva, king of the vanaras and bears and restored the kingship of Sugriva.
5::51::10::You know of Vali, chief of the vanaras, in the past. Rama killed him with a single arrow in the combat. 
5::51::11::Sugriva, who is true to his word and a faithful warrior, king of monkeys anxiously sent vanaras in all directions for searching Sita.
5::51::12::Hundreds, thousands and unlimited number of monkeys are searching (for Sita) in all directions, in the underworld and heavens and the sky. 
5::51::13::Some of the very powerful heroes equal to Garuda, equal to the Windgod (in swiftness) have gone (in quest of Sita) without touching the earth.
5::51::14::I, Maruta's son, Hanuman by name too came swiftly leaping across a hundred yojanas across the ocean searching for Sita.
5::51::15::While I was roaming I saw Janaka's daughter Sita at your house.You are a knower of the truth of righteousness. You are very wise and carrried out great austerities. It does not behove you to abduct another man's wife.
5::51::16::Indeed, respectable people and wise men like you should not indulge in actions opposed to righteousness as it will strike at the very root of your existence.
5::51::17::Who, even among gods and asuras can withstand the arrows released by Lakshmana in obedience to the infuriated Rama's orders?
5::51::18::O king  there is none in these three worlds who can enjoy happiness by displeasing Rama.
5::51::19::Think that my advice is beneficial to you for you present, past and future. It is righteous. It will provide you material wealth too. Hence return Sita to the lord of the people.
5::51::20::I have actually spotted the divine lady here which was most difficult. Rama will plan the remaining course of action.
5::51::21::I have seen Sita immersed in deep sorrow. You do not realise that by abducting her you are keeping a fivehooded female serpent in your house.
5::51::22::Just as food mixed with venom cannot be digested by the great fire (fire of hunger), it is not possible to keep Sita even by gods and demons. (Sita is like food mixed with poison. Ravana cannot digest her with all his power.)  
5::51::23::You have acquired the merit of righteousness by prolonged hardships experienced during your penance. It is not proper to forfeit your own life in this way.  
5::51::24::You know you will not be killed by asuras or gods. In that case also this (keeping Sita with you) may be the prime cause of your death.
5::51::25::Sugriva is not an demon, nor a danava nor gandharva, nor a yaksha nor even a pannaga. Therefore how can you save your life from Sugriva?
5::51::26::The fruit of dharma does not accrue to one who has reached the culmination of  adharma. Unrighteousness will destroy  the fruits of righteousness.
5::51::27::There is no doubt you have earned merit through righteousness (dharma destroys adharma and yields sweet fruit ultimately). But now you will quickly reap the result of your unrighteousness also.
5::51::28::You know about the killing of all ogres at Janasthana and of Vali also. You know about the alliance of Rama and Sugriva. You may  decide on a proper course of action for the sake of your own welfare.
5::51::29:: Alone, I can destroy this entire Lanka teeming with horses, chariots and elephants. Indeed I have the energy but not the mandate of Sri Rama.
5::51::30::Rama made a vow in the presence of bears and vanaras that he would exterminate the arrogant enemy troops  by whom Sita is abducted and assaulted.
5::51::31::Indra, the destroyer of enemy citadels cannot live happily if he offends Rama. What to speak of persons like you?
5::51::32::Sita who is under your custody is no ordinary lady. She is indeed the dark night of dissolution, destroyer of entire Lanka. Know this.
5::51::33::Stop holding the noose of death in Sita's form whom you yourself have placed on your shoulders. Think of your own welfare.
5::51::34::Visualize this city of Lanka including its marketplaces and main streets as  burnt by Sita's power of chastity and  Rama's anger.
5::51::35::Do not pave the path of your friends, ministers, clan, brothers and sisters, sons, wellwishers, wives and luxuries and Lanka to destruction.
5::51::36::O king of demon listen to the words of truth of the servant of Rama, his messenger and specially a vanara.
5::51::37::Illustrious Rama can put an end  to and dissolve all creatures including both movable and immovables of all worlds. He can recreate all of them in the same way. He has such superhuman powers.
5::51::38::He is equal to Visnu in valour. There is none who can dare face his rage, be it among gods, asuras, yakshas, rakshasas, vidyadharas, gandharvas uragas, siddhas, kings of kinnaras, birds and all beings at all places and at all times.
5::51::39::Rama is the supreme lord of all worlds, a lion among kings. Having pained him it is very difficult for you to sustain your life after offending him to this extent.
5::51::40::O king of demons, even devas, daityas, gandharvas, vidyadharas, nagas, and yakshas are incompetent to face Rama the lord of the three worlds in wars.
5::51::41::Even the selfborn, fourfaced Brahma, the threeeyed Siva who destroyed Tripura, Mahendra, the king of suras do not have the power to save one whom Rama decides to kill. 
5::51::42::The tenheaded Ravana who was of matchless strength, hearing the unpleasant words of advice and warning expressed skilfully with dignity by the great Hanuman, enraged Ravana, his eyes rolling in anger ordered the execution of Hanuman.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyfirst sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
