5::54::1::With his objectives achieved, the monkey gazed at Lanka with growing zeal and pondered over the remaining work. 
5::54::2::'Is there anything still left which can further torment the demons here?
5::54::3::
5::54::4::'If the citadel is destroyed it would be a happy conclusion with a little effort. I can successfully complete my task.
5::54::5::'It would be proper to satiate this fire at the end of my tail  by offering it to these excellent mansions (I shall set fire to these houses). 
5::54::6::The great Hanuman, with his burning tail wandered on tops of the mansions of Lanka, which looked like clouds with lightning.
5::54::7::The vanara moved from one house to the other, looking at the gardens and houses of the demons without fear.
5::54::8::Powerful and brave Hanuman who was equal to the Windgod in speed jumped down on the house of Prahasta and set fire to it. From there he jumped on to Mahaparsva's house and set it ablaze. Hanuman appeared like the fireflame at the time of dissolution.
5::54::9::The great, brilliant vanara bounded on to Vajradamstra's, of Suka's and wise Sarana's.
5::54::10::Thus Hanuman, the chief of the vanaras set fire to Indrajit's residence and then to Jambumali's and Sumali's building.
5::54::11::The brilliant monkey leader bypassed Vibhishanas's house and avoiding it that way set fire to the mansions of other ogres, Rasmiketu, Suryasatru, Hrasvakarna, Vajradamshtra, Romasa, Yuddhonmatta, Matta, Dhwajagriva, Vidyujjihva, Hastimukha, Karala, Pisacha, Sonitaksha, Kumbhakarna, Makaraksha, Yagnasatru, Brahmasatru, Naranthaka, Kumbha, and wicked Nikumbha.
5::54::12::Moving among those highly luxurious mansions the glorious Vanara burnt away the wealth of all the rich demons.
5::54::13:: Heroic and illustrious Hanuman, having crossed all the residences of the ogres finally reached the palace of Ravana, the king.
5::54::14::Then Hanuman, the hero with the burning tail set fire to the chief palace of Ravana that resembled mountains Meru and Mandara, decorated with different kinds of gems and exquisite with several auspicious articles. While the flames were rising up, he roared like the thundering cloud at the time of dissolution.
5::54::15::The windgod's association made the fire spread at great speed. It appeared like fire at the time of dissolution.
5::54::16::Combined with the wind the fire began to spread, burning the houses with great speed.
5::54::17::The palatial structures with windows of golden meshwork, embedded with pearls and gems and other precious stones tumbled.
5::54::18::Unable to protect their rich houses, and thoroughly disappointed the demons said, 'Alas, the Firegod came in the form of a vanara' A tumultuous sound arose.
5::54::19::A few shedemons at once jumped out of their burning mansions surrounded by fire. They held their breastfeeding babies in their arms, their hair let loose shouting as they jumped. As they were alighting, they glowed like lightnings dropping from the clouds.
5::54::20::Hanuman saw many colourful molten minerals mixed with diamonds, corals vaiduryas, pearls and silver flowing (dropping) from every mansion.  
5::54::21:: Just as fire is not satisfied with dry sticks and grass Hanuman was not satisfied with the dead demons. 
5::54::22::The flames of fire were shining like kimsuka flowers here, like salmali wood there, and like saffron flowers elsewhere.
5::54::23::Hanuman, endowed with great speed, burnt Lanka just as Tripurari, or Rudra burnt theTripuras (three cities of gold, silver and iron). 
5::54::24::The fierce fire lit by Hanuman, the hero endowed with great speed, spread around in circles and shot up flying high to the top of the Trikuta mountain on which Lanka was located.
5::54::25::Fanned by the wind, inflamed by the fat from the corpses of the demons, the fire spread in the mansions burning without smoke. It spread with great speed like the fire at the end of the universe. 
5::54::26::The highly radiant fire stood like a crore of Suns surrounding the entire Lanka. It was glowing, cracking like Indra's thunderbolt as though the whole universe was collapsing.
5::54::27::The dazzling flames of fire red like kimsuka flowers shot up violently into the sky. The clouds engulfed by the smoke rising from the subsiding fire was shining like the lustre of blue lotuses .
5::54::28::'Is this the wielder of thunderbolt Indra, who is the king of gods? Is it Yama himself? Is It the Windgod, or Firegod, or Varuna or Rudra? Is it Kubera or Sun or Moon or is it the god of death himself? He cannot be a mere monkey, indeed.
5::54::29::'Or is it Grandfather Brahma, the supreme fourfaced god enraged and arrived in the form of vanara to kill the clan of demons?
5::54::30::'Can he be the vast boundless energy, the unthinkable and infinite lord Visnu assuming the monkeyform? Is he the peerless, unmanifest form beyond all imagination who has arrived here by virtue of his Maya (illusory power) in order to destroy the demons'?
5::54::31::All eminent demons having collected together, quickly surveyed the situation.Seeing the burnt city, with  all its living creatures, houses and trees consigned to the flames, they spoke to one another.
5::54::32::Lanka with its chariots horses, elephants, flocks of birds, animals and trees burnt all of a sudden, the ogres cried loudly and piteously.
5::54::33::O father dear O son O my dear O friend alas, the life which is enjoyable, sacred and prosperous is destroyed in this way. Saying this, the demons cried out dreadfully and loudly.
5::54::34::With the Fire god spreading flames all over, heroes dead, retreating troops shattered by Hanuman's anger, Lanka appeared as though it was cursed.
5::54::35::Highly sensitive Hanuman saw the city of Lanka filled with perplexed, scared and sorrowful demons, Lanka succumbed to the flames of firegod and looked as if it was  hit by the anger of Brahma, the selfborn god. 
5::54::36::Hanuman, son of the Windgod stood at ease having shattered the garden that was full of excellent trees, and killed the demons and burnt down rows of beautiful houses in the city.
5::54::37::Standing on the peak of Trikuta mountain with his tail burning like the aura of the Sun, the lion among vanaras looked resplendent like the Sun surrounded by his rays.
5::54::38::Great Hanuman, sought Rama's presence in his mind after killing many demons, breaking down many trees of the garden, and setting fire to the mansions of demons. 
5::54::39:: All the gods praised the vanara chief, son of the Windgod, who was powerful, wise and efficient and had the speed of the Wind. 
5::54::40::Hanuman destroyed the garden, killed the demons, burnt the city of Lanka and was shining with delight
5::54::41::The gandharvas, gods, siddhas and great sages were amazed at seeing the burning city of Lanka৷৷
5::54::42::All beings were afraid of Hanuman thinking that he was the fatal fire, consuming worlds at the hour of dissolution .
5::54::43::All gods, great sages, gandharvas, vidyadharas, nagas and yakshas and all great beings experienced supreme joy.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे चतुःपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyfourth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
