5::59::1::मारुतात्मजः son of the Windgod, हनुमान् Hanuman, सर्वम् entire, तत् एतत् all that, आख्याय having narrated, भूयः whatever happened, उत्तरं वचनम् the good words, वक्तुम् told, समुपचक्राम again started telling. 
5::59::2::राघवोद्योगः Rama's exertions, सुग्रीवस्य Sugriva's, सम्भ्रमः enthusiasm, सीतायाः Sita's, शीलम् conduct, आसाद्य attained, सफलः successl, मम I am, मनश्च in my mind, प्रवणम् developed devotion.  
5::59::3::महात्मा great soul, सा that, कृतागसम् has done harm, दशग्रीवम् to Ravana, न हन्ति not killed, इति यत् this being so, नियतः of good conduct, समुदाचारः chaste, भर्तरि towards husband, उत्तमा high, भक्तिः devotion. 
5::59::4::ताम् her, स्पृशतः with mere touch, तस्य of her, गात्रम् body, तपसा by penance, न विनाशितम् not destroyed, क्रोधकलुषीकृता if enraged (she) can destroy, जनकस्य Janaka's, आत्मजा daughter, यत् such, कुर्यात् she can do, तत् that, पाणिना by hand, संस्पृष्टासती touched with hand, अग्निशिखा like flame of fire, न कुर्यात् not done so.  
5::59::5::भवताम् to you, निवेदिते relating to you, अस्मिन् your, कार्ये task, एवं गते to go there, जाम्बवत्प्रमुखान् with Jambavan and other important people, महाहरीन् great vanara heroes, समनुज्ञाप्य with their permission, वैदेह्या सह along with Vaidehi, तौ both, पार्थिवात्मजौ king's sons, द्रष्टुम् to see, न्याय्यं स्म is proper. 
5::59::6::अहम् I, एकोऽपि alone, सराक्षसगणाम् all the demon troops, तां लङ्कां पुरीम् and that city of Lanka, महाबलम् the great army, रावणं च and Ravana, तरसा quickly, हन्तुम् can kill, पर्याप्तः is enough. 
5::59::7::बलवद्भिः strong, कृतात्मभिः wise, कृतास्त्रै: accomplished, शूरैः heroic, विजयैषिभिः those desiring victory, प्लवगैः monkeys, भवद्भिः are with you, सहितः together, किं पुनः why speak again? 
5::59::8::अहं तु I also, युद्धे in war, ससैन्यम् all the army, सपुरःसरम् his followers, सपुत्त्रम् his sons, सहोदरयुतम् his brothers, रावणम् of Ravana, युधि in war, वधिRष्यामि can kill.  
5::59::9::ब्राह्मम् Brahma's, ऐन्द्रं च even Indra's, रौद्रं च Rudra's, वायव्यम् or Windgod's, तथा similarly, वारुणम् Varuna's, शक्रजितः Indrajit, अस्त्राणि missiles, दुर्निरीक्षाणि though difficult to see, यदि such, तानि of them, संयुगे in war, वधिष्यामि will kill, राक्षसान् demon, हनिष्यामि च and destroy them. 
5::59::10::भवताम् by you, अभ्यनुज्ञातः now permit me, मे I, विक्रमः with my valour, तम् them, रुणद्धि  shattered,मया by me, विसृष्टा sent forth, अतुला matchless, निरन्तरा ceaseless, शैलवृष्टिः shower of rocks, रणे in war, देवानपि even gods, हन्यात् will die, तान् those, निशाचरान् nightrangers, किं पुनः what to say ?
5::59::11::सागरः ocean, वेलाम् shore, अतियादपि exceeds also, मन्दरः mountain Mandara, प्रचलेदपि may shake up, समरे in war, अरिवाहिनी flow of enemies, जाम्बवन्तम् Jambavan, न कम्पयेत् not move.  
5::59::12::वीरः hero, वालिसुतः son of Vali, कपिः vanara, एकः alone, सर्वराक्षससङ्घानाम् all the demon hordes, पूर्वकाः led, ये by him, विनाशाय to destroy, अलम् enough. 
5::59::13::पनसस्य Panasa's, महात्मनः great soul, नीलस्य च even Nila, उरुवेगेन by the speed of his thighs, मन्दरोऽपि even Mandara mountain, अवशीर्येत would be shattered, युधि in battle, राक्षसाः demons, किं पुनः what to say again. 
5::59::14::सदेवासुरयक्षेषु gods, and yakshas, गन्दर्वोरगपक्षिषु gandharvas, nagas and birds, मैन्दस्य Mainda's, द्विविदस्य वा or Dvivida, प्रतियोद्दारम् who can oppose in battle, शंसत tell me. 
5::59::15::अश्विपुत्रौ sons of Aswini, एतौ so also, महाभागौ  outstanding, प्लवगसत्तमौ foremost fighters, रणाजिरे  proud of fighting war, एतयोः these people, प्रतियोद्दारम् to oppose, न पश्यामि I do not see any. 
5::59::16::पितामहवरोत्सेकात् by virtue of the boons received from Brahma, परमम् very, दर्पम् proud, आस्थितौ filled with, एतौ both of them that way, वानरसत्तमौ foremost of vanaras, अमृतप्राशिनौ have consumed nectar of immortality. 
5::59::17::पुरा earlier, सर्वलोकपितामहः Brahma the grandfather of all worlds, अश्विनोः for Aswini sons, माननार्थम् to honour, अनयोः given, अतुलम् immeasureable, सर्वावध्यत्वम् invulnerability, दत्तवान् given. 
5::59::18::वरोत्सेकेन armed with the pride of boons, मत्तौ च and intoxicated, वीरौ heroic, प्लवङ्गमौ monkeys, सुराणाम् of suras, महतीम् vast, चमूम् प्रमथ्य army slain, अमृतम् nectar of immortality, पीतवन्तौ drank. 
5::59::19::सङ्कृद्धौ if they become angry, एतावेव these two, सवाजिरथकुञ्जराम् the cavalry, chariots and elephants, लङ्काम् Lanka also, नाशयितुम् to destroy, शक्तौ have the power, सर्वे all, वानराः vanaras, तिष्ठन्तु even if they stay away. 
5::59::20::लङ्का Lanka, मयैव myself, निहता burn, राजमार्गेषु in the royal path, सर्वत्र everywhere, मया by me, नाम name, विश्रावितम् become popular. 
5::59::21::अतिबलः mighty, रामः Rama, जयति will triumph, महाबलः mighty, लक्ष्मणश्च and Lakshmana, राघवेण by Rama, अभिपालितः protected, राजा king, सुग्रीवः Sugriva, जयति will triumph, पवनसम्भवः son of the Windgod, अहम् I, कोसलराजस्य king of Kosala kingdom, दासः servant, हनुमान् Hanuman, इति this, मया by me, नाम name, विश्रावितम् announced. 
5::59::22::दुरात्मनः wicked, रावणस्य Ravana's, अशोकवनिकामध्ये in the midst of Ashoka garden, शिंशुपावृक्षे Simsupa tree, अधस्तात् under, साध्वी noble lady, राक्षसीभिः by ogresses, परिवृता surrounded, शोकसन्तापकर्शिता tormented by tears, मेघलेखापरिवृता veiled by clouds, चन्द्रलेखेव like the Moonrays, निष्प्रभा without  brightness, बलदर्पितम्  glory, रावणम् Ravana, अचिन्तयन्ती not even thinking, वैदेही Vaidehi, करुणम् piteous, आस्थिता remained. 
5::59::23::पतिव्रता chaste woman, सुश्रोणी who has beautiful hips, जानकी Janaki, अवष्टब्धा though bound, शुभा auspicious, वैदेही Vaidehi, सर्वात्मना all her self, रामम् Rama only, अनुरक्ता devoted, पुरन्दरे Indra, पौलोमीव like Sachi the wife of Indra, रामे only on Rama, अनन्यचित्ता always thinking. 
5::59::24::तदेकवासस्संवीता wearing only one cloth, तथैव च with that only, रजोध्वस्ता filled with dust, शोकसन्तापदीनाङ्गी very sorrowful and piteous, सीता Sita, भर्तृहिते wishing the welfare of her husband, रता remained. 
5::59::25::विरूपाभिः uglylooking, राक्षसीभिः ogresses, मुहुर्मुहुः again and again, तर्ज्यमाना threatened, एकवेणीधरा with a single braid, दीना pathetic, भर्तृचिन्तापरायणा thinking of her husband all the time, अधः now, शय्या lying on floor, हिमागमे in winter season, पद्मिनिव like the lotus, विवर्णाङ्गी devoid of lustre, रावणात् by Ravana, विनिवृत्तार्था turned away, मर्तव्यकृतनिश्चया decided to die, सा that she, मया by me, राक्षसीमध्ये in the midst of ogresses, प्रमदावने in the pleasure garden, दृष्टा saw her.  
5::59::26::मृगशाबाक्षी fawneyed woman, कथञ्चित् little, विश्वासम् confidence, उपपादिता pacified, ततः then, संभाषिता चैव after conversing only, सर्वम् everything, अर्थं च with difficulty, दर्शिता presented, रामसुग्रीवसख्यं च alliance of Rama and Sugriva, श्रुत्वा after hearing, प्रीतिम् happy, उपागता became. 
5::59::27::रामस्तु Rama also, तस्य his, वधे killing, निमित्तमात्रं instrumental, भविष्यति will be, प्रकृत्यैव naturally, तन्वङ्गी thin body, तद्वियोगात् by the separation from her husband, कर्शिता च and also emaciated, सा she, प्रतिपत्पाठशीलस्य just as a student on the new Moon day, विद्येव shrunken, तनुमताम्  slender in body, गता has become. 
5::59::28::महाभागा noble lady, सीता Sita, अस्ते being, एवम् in this way, शोकपरायणा absorbed in grief, अत्र there, यत् that, प्रतिकर्तव्यम् what is to be done, तत् that, सर्वम् all, उपपाद्यताम् you may do. 
