5::18::1::The night came to a close while Hanuman went searching and looking for Sita at Ashoka grove full of flowering trees.
5::18::2::At dawn sounds of recitation of Vedas and the six auxillary sciences, (i.e .grammar, prosody, etymology, phonetics, astronomy and the science of rituals) by the brahmins among demons wellversed in performing exalted sacrificial ceremonies were heard. 
5::18::3::By that time the strongarmed, powerful, tennecked Ravana was awakened by the delightful sounds of auspicious musical instruments.
5::18::4::The chivalrous lord of demons woke up as usual.His raiment and garland were still in disarray and he thought of Vaidehi.
5::18::5::The demon king who was unable to hide his great passion and control his senses was drawn towards Sita, in his state of intoxication. 
5::18::6::Adorned with all ornaments and glowing with excellent splendour he went through the path filled with trees flourishing with all kinds of flowers and fruits.
5::18::7::Ponds covered with a variety of beautiful flowers and colourful birds always cheerful looked very wonderful. 
5::18::8::Watching the garden filled with trees, gateways ornamented with gold and gems, he entered through the pleasant pathways in the Ashoka garden. There were wonderful wolves and several herds of animals in the garden. Fruits dropped from trees were strewn all over. 
5::18::9::Ravana, son of sage Paulasti, was followed by a hundred women, just as Indra is trailed by the females of gods and gandharvas.
5::18::10::Some women carried golden lamps, some held yalk tail fans in their hands while others bore palmleaf fans.
5::18::11::Some moved ahead of him carrying water in golden pitchers. Others followed him carrying circular couches (to be used as seats).
5::18::12::One glorious and compassionate lady carried in her right hand a gemstudded jar filled with wine.
5::18::13::Another shedemon moved behind him holding an umbrella with a golden handle which was white like a royal swan and bright like the fullmoon.
5::18::14::The chief wives of Ravana with eyes dizzy with sleep and drinking followed their heroic husband like streaks of lightning follow a thunder cloud. (Ravana who was dark looked like a cloud and the women with dazzling golden complexion appeared like lightning.)
5::18::15::The necklaces and armlets (of the wives) disarrayed, the sandal paste and other unguents on the body smudged, hair hanging down their faces, the sweating damsels followed Ravana. They were dizzy with leftover intoxication and sleep and were swaying from side to side. Their dishevelled hair was loose and faces filled with sweat, their flower garlands on the body had wilted due to sweat on their limbs. The drunken wives of Ravana, actuated by their high regard and passion for him followed as he advanced with drunken eyes. 
5::18::16::Their husband, powerful Ravana under the control of passion looking dull, absorbed in the  thoughts of Sita walked slowly as though counting his steps.
5::18::17::Then Hanuman, son of the Windgod, heard their jingling golden girdles and anklets.
5::18::18::Then Hanuman, the Vanara saw Ravana of extraordinary deeds, and of unimaginable strength and valour at the entrance (of Ashoka garden)
5::18::19::Hanuman saw him in the glow of lamps wet with fragrant oil carried by many shedemons all over.
5::18::20::Hanuman saw him, who was possessed of lust, arrogance and intoxication. He appeared like Cupid setting aside his quiver and arrows with his curved, big, red eyes.
5::18::21::He was playfully pulling up his upper garment that slipped and stuck to his armlet. This excellent unsoiled robe was looking like the foam of churned nectar.
5::18::22::Hanuman seated on a leafy branch (of the simsupa tree) thickly covered with leaves and flowers started scanning the identity of Ravana who was drawing nearer.
5::18::23::The leader of the monkeys started gazing at the chief wives of Ravana endowed with youth and beauty৷৷
5::18::24::Surrounded by beauties, the glorious king entered the grove meant for women, reverberating with the sounds of beasts and birds.
5::18::25::The brilliant vanara looked at the son of Visravas (Ravana), the demon king  adorned with wonderful ornaments. He had long tapering ears. He was intoxicated with drink. Encircled by damsels, he was looking like the Moon surrounded by stars.
5::18::26::The brilliant vanara (Hanuman), son of the Windgod recognising the strongarmed Ravana got down a little, saying 'This is truly the strongarmed Ravana.'
5::18::27::Hanuman, possessed of extraordinary energy, was taken aback at the might of Ravana. He remained hiding covered over with leaves.  
5::18::28::With the desire to see Sita endowed with black hair, beautiful hips, plump breasts and dark sideglances, Ravana returned (to Ashokavana).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे अष्टादशस्सर्गः।Thus ends the eighteenth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
