5::47::1::Hearing the sad news of death of the five army generals including their followers and destruction of their vehicles, King (Ravana) gave a suggestive look at prince Aksha who was inclined to fight the war.
5::47::2::Spurred by the mere glance of Ravana, the glorious Aksha with his wonderful bow inlaid with gold sprang up from the royal assembly just as flame rises from firesanctuary when oblations are poured in by reputed brahmins.
5::47::3::Ascending a glittering chariot inlaid with pure gold Aksha, the courageous bull among giants looking splendid like the rising Sun, marched forth towards the great vanara.
5::47::4::The chariot was (strong as it was) gained by his austerities of high order. It was overlaid with pure gold armour, fixed with flags, and staff, studded with precious gems, yoked to the best of eight horses and endowed with the speed of mind.
5::47::5::(The chariot) was unassailable to suras or asuras.It moved without touching the ground, it could fly in air and had the splendour of the Sun. It was equipped readily with quivers, eight swords, javelins and clubs placed in right order.
5::47::6::Prince Aksha, whose courage was equal to that of gods, shone like the Sun. He ascended the splendid chariot decked with golden garlands shining like Sun and Moon, equipped with all weapons, bows and shields etc, he went out.
5::47::7::Seated on the chariot he (Aksha) sallied forth along with the army filling the entire earth and mountains with the sounds of horses, elephants and rumblings of big chariots and reached the portal where the great vanara stood.
5::47::8::The lioneyed Aksha saw the vanara who appeared like the cosmic fire at the time of dissolution of the universe. The prince was astonished and struck with awe (at the majestic form of the Vanara) and looked at him with great  respect.
5::47::9::Aksha, the mighty prince judging the speed and prowess of the monkey with his own in confronting enemies and the strength of the monkey, began to swell up in spirit like the glow of the Sun at the end of winter. 
5::47::10::Knowing that it is difficult to win Hanuman who was steady and of irresistible valour Aksha was angry. Remaining steady, with full attention, he provoked the vanara to fight and released three sharp arrows.
5::47::11::Then Aksha contempuously looked at Hanuman who had conquered his fatigue and was determined to defeat the enemy. Holding in his hands his bow and arrows proudly, he reflected.
5::47::12::Adorned with armlets studded with golden coins and lovely earrings Aksha advanced instantaneously to meet the monkey. Their matchless combat excuitement and enthusiasm even among gods and demons.
5::47::13::Witnessing the fight between Hanuman and Prince Aksha, even the earth shrieked in agony, the Sun became dim, the wind stopped blowing, mountains were shaken, the sky thundered and even the ocean was agitated.
5::47::14::Heroic Aksha, who was good at targeting correctly, with due  concentration struck the vanara on his head with three goldenshafted, winged arrows with feathers smeared with poison which resembled serpents. 
5::47::15::With the three arrows shot on his forehead simultaneously his eyes were drenched with flowing blood and with arrows shining like rays he appeared like the rising Sun, garlanded by glowing rays.
5::47::16::Hanuman, the esteemed minister of the copperyeyed Sugriva observed the prince holding manifold splendid weapons. He rejoiced, grew in size ready to fight, making the necessary prepararions (taking the required position).
5::47::17::Huge Hanuman, endowed with strength and valour looked  like the rising Sun on the peak of mount Mandara. He looked at prince Aksha and his army as well as his vehicles as though he was burning them with the rays emerging from his fiery eyes.
5::47::18::Aksha, with his wonderful quiver and bow, began to rain rapidly a shower of arrows in the battle, on the mountainlike monkeylord just as a cloud rains on a mountain.
5::47::19::Then Hanuman saw prince Aksha, endowed with excessive splendour, power and energy advancing in a fierce manner like a cloud in the battle. Then Hanuman happy (to see the heroic prince) roared like a clap of thunder.
5::47::20::Young Aksha, proud of his valour with eyes bloodshot in anger rushed towards the matchless Hanuman, just as an elephant would approach a huge pitfall covered with grass.
5::47::21::Struck by the arrows released by prince Aksha, Hanuman roared violently like a thundering cloud and leaped into the sky  putting up a fierce appearance, stretching his arms and thighs.
5::47::22::
5::47::23::Dodging like the wind  between the arrows and also escaping the arrows Hanuman, who was swift in movement like the mind, was seen exhibiting his terrific valour in the battle while he moved in the sky.
5::47::24::Admiring the young Aksha's appearance, his skill in holding the quiver and spreading the excellent arrows with missiles and facing the war, Hanuman became thoughtful (as to how to kill him).
5::47::25::The strongarmed Hanuman, who was aware of the propriety of actions, wounded in his arms by the warrior prince started roaring and thinking about the next strategy in the combat.
5::47::26::'He (Aksha) is like the radiant, rising Sun with extraordinary might. He is accomplishing great deeds unlike young warriors of his age and is exhibiting a magnificent feat. He knows all means of fighting. I do not feel like cutting him to size. My mind does not allow me to kill this boy.
5::47::27::'He is a great self. His valour is also admirable. He is focused in battle and highly tolerant. There is no doubt that on account of his excellence  even nagas, yakshas and sages offer salutations to him.
5::47::28::'His mental horizon is enhanced by his valour and power. He is standing before me and dares to look into my eyes. Surely his swift movement and valour will shake  even the minds of suras and asuras.
5::47::29::If I ignore him now, he would get the better of me (I have to consider his challenge seriously). His valour in the battle is growing. It is proper to subdue him now. A spreading fire cannot be neglected.
5::47::30::Reflecting on the power of the enemy, the mighty and valiant vanara thought of his own course of action. Hanuman made up his mind to kill the enemy and increased his speed.
5::47::31::Hanuman the brave son of the Windgod hit with his palm and killed the eight horses (yoked to Aksha's chariot) which had great speed were stable and had the capacity to  bear heavy loads while turning round in the sky. (The battle was fought in the air since Hanuman leaped into the air and the demon hero had to resist him there).
5::47::32::Then hit by Hanuman with his palm, the minister of the copperyeyed Sugriva, the huge chariot seat of Aksha was broken, the wooden frame of the yoke was disjointed, horses were  slain and the great chariot fell down from the sky. 
5::47::33::
5::47::34::Thereupon Hanuman with the prowess that was equal to wind, approaching the sky firmly caught hold of the legs of Aksha flying into the abode of Garuda, the Windgod and the Siddhas. 
5::47::35::Hanuman, the foremost of the vanaras who was equal to his father in valour, seized him just as Garuda, the lord of birds, would seize a great serpent. And spinning him round speedily a thousand times and hitting him, dropped him on the earth.
5::47::36::Hit by Hanuman, the ogre's arms, thighs, hips and neck broken, bones rendered to fragments, eyes protruded, joints disjointed, tendons strewn he was thrown down on the earth dripping blood. 
5::47::37::When the great vanara dashed Aksha down on to the earth, the king of demons was struck with terror. The great sages who go round the planets, great seers who were observants of vows, yakshas, panagas, suras including Indra all beings collected together and looked at the vanara with awe.
5::47::38::Hanuman, the hero with bloodshot eyes having  slain Aksha, shone resplendent like the son of Indra (Jayanta), and reached the portal, and waited looking like the god of death determined to destroy all beings.  इत्यार्षे वाल्मीकीये श्रीमद्रामायणे आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे सप्तचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyseventh sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
