5::56::1::ततः then, शिंशुपामूले under the simsupa tree, पर्युपस्थिताम् stationed, जानकीम् Janakai, अभिवाद्य offered salutation, अब्रवीत् said, दिष्ट्या luckily, अक्षताम् unscathed, त्वाम् you, इह here, पश्यामि I see you. 
5::56::2::ततः then, प्रस्थितम् him who was ready to start his journey, तं हनुमन्तम् that Hanuman, पुनः पुनः again and again, वीक्षमाणा looking at him, सीता Sita, भर्तृस्नेहान्वितम् showing her love for her husband, वाक्यम् this word, अभाषत spoke. 
5::56::3::परवीरघ्नः destroyer of foes, अस्य कार्यस्य of this task, परिसाधने in this task (of rescuing), त्वम् you, एकः एव singlehanded, कामम् indeed, पर्याप्तः capable, ते to you, बलोदयः rise of strength, यशस्यः will bring glory.
5::56::4::परबलार्दनः slayer of enemy forces,काकुत्स्थः Kakutstha,लङ्काम् to Lanka, शरैः तु with arrows indeed, सङ्कुलाम् spreading, कृत्वा all over, माम् me, नयेद्यदि if he takes me, तत् that, तस्य for him, सदृशम् worthy, भवेत् will be. 
5::56::5::तत् that, महात्मनः the exalted, आहवशूरस्य who is chivalrous in the battle, तस्य his, विक्रान्तम् heroic advance, अनुरूपम् worthy of his stature, यथा as such, भवति will be, तथा that manner, त्वम् you, उपपादय act.  
5::56::6::हनुमान् Hanuman, प्रश्रितम् properly inclined, हेतुसंहितम् support with reason, अर्थोपहितम् meaningful, तस्याः  her, तत् that, वाक्यम् word, निशम्य after hearing, उत्तरम् reply, वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवीत् spoke. 
5::56::7::काकुत्स्थः Kakutstha, हर्यृक्षप्रवरैः with the foremost among vanaras and bears, वृतः surrounded, क्षिप्रम् very soon, एष्यति he will come, यः he who, युधि in battle, अरीन् enemies, विजित्य having won, ते your, शोकम् sorrow, व्यपनयिष्यति will remove. 
5::56::8::मारुतात्मजः son of the Windgod, हनुमान् Hanuman, वैदेहीम् to Vaidehi, एवम् in that way, आश्वास्य having consoled, गमनाय to depart, मतिम् his mind, कृत्वा after deciding, वैदेहीम् to Vaidehi, अभ्यवादयत् respectfully saluted. 
5::56::9::ततः then, अरिमर्दनः crusher of foes, सः he, कपिशार्दूलः a tiger among vanaras, स्वामिसन्दर्शनोत्सुकः anxious to see his lord, अरिष्टम् Arishta, गिरिश्रेष्ठम् excellent mountain, आरुरोह ascended. 
5::56::10::तुङ्गपद्मकजुष्टाभि: by those choicest tall padmaka trees, नीलाभिः by dark ones, वनराजिभिः with forest ranges, शृङ्गान्तरविलम्बिभिः hanging down from the spaces between the peaks of mountain, अम्भोदैः the rainy clouds, सोत्तरीयमिव as if covered with an upper garment. 
5::56::11::शुभैः with auspicious ones, दिवाकरकरैः with Sun's rays, प्रीत्या affectionately, बोध्यमानमिव as if he was being awakened, उद्धूतैः with those pushed up (by wind), लोचनैरिव like with the eyes, धातुभिः with the minerals, उन्मिषन्तमिव as if he opening.
5::56::12::मन्द्रैः with loud, तोयौघनिस्वनैः sounds of gurgling masses of waters, प्राधीतमिव as if reciting (loudly), विस्पष्टैः with clear sounds, नानाप्रस्रवणस्वनैः with different kinds of sounds of waterfalls, प्रगीतमिव as if singing, पर्वतम् mountain. 
5::56::13::अत्युच्चैः by the tall ones, देवदारुभिः with devadaru trees, ऊर्ध्वबाहुमिव as if with raised hands, स्थितम् standing, प्रपातजलनिर्घोषैः with the sounds of waterfalls, सर्वतः all over, प्राक्रुष्टमिव like the reverberations  
5::56::14::श्यामैः with dark ones, कम्पमानैः with shaking, शरद्वनैः clouds of autumn, वेपमानमिव as if trembling, वेणुभिः कीचकैः with hollow bamboos, मारुतोद्धूतैः hit by the wind, कीचकैः hollow bamboos rattling in the wind, कूजन्तमिव appearing like the warbling sound. 
5::56::15::घोरैः with dreadful ones, आशीविषोत्तमैः with poisonous snakes, निःश्वसन्तमिव as if hissing, नीहारकृतगम्भीरैः with majestically covered heavy mist, गह्वरैः with caves, ध्यायन्तमिव as though meditating, controlling all senses.  
5::56::16::मेघपादनिभैः appearing like the feet of clouds, पादैः with its feet, सर्वत: all over, प्रक्रान्तमिव as if traversing, अभ्रमालिभिः with ranges of clouds, शिखरैः with its peaks, आकाशे in the sky, जृम्भमाणमिव as if yawning. 
5::56::17::बहुधा many kinds, कीर्णैः scattered with, बहुकन्दरैः with many caves, कूटैश्च with mountain peaks, शोभितम् delighting, बहुभिः with many, सालतालाश्वकर्णैश्च with Sal, palms, Aswakarna trees and, वंशैश्च with bamboos and reeds, वृतम् canopied with. 
5::56::18::विततैः with those spread out, पुष्पवद्भिः with those filled with flowers, लतावितानैः with creepers stretched all over, अलङ्कृतम् decorated, नानामृगगणाकीर्णम् crowded with herds of animals, धातुनिष्यन्दभूषितम् decorated with colourful minerals dropping down. 
5::56::19::बहुप्रस्रवणोपेतम् full of waterfalls, शिलासञ्चयसङ्कटम् with heaps of rocks making (the streams' flow difficult), महर्षियक्षगन्धर्वकिन्नरोरगसेवितम् attended with sages, yakshas, gandharvas, kinnaras and nagas. 
5::56::20::लतापादपसङ्घातम् with clusters of creepers and trees, सिंहाध्युषितकन्दरम् caves inhabited by lions, व्याघ्रसङ्घसमाकीर्णम् herds of tigers scattered all over, स्वादुमूलफलद्रुमम् full of trees bearing tasty roots and fruits.
5::56::21::पवनात्मजः son of the Windgod, हनुमान् Hanuman, रामदर्शनशीघ्रेण anxious to see Rama soon, प्रहर्षेण with joy, अभिचोदितः  prompted, तं पर्वतम् that mountain, आरुरोह ascended. 
5::56::22::ततः then, रम्येषु in delightful ones, गिरिसानुषु on mountain ranges, तेन by him, पादतलाक्रान्ताः crushed by his feet, शिलाः rocks, सघोषाः making loud sound, चूर्णीकृताः reduced to powder, समशीर्यन्त rolled down. 
5::56::23::सः महाकपिः that great Hanuman, लवणाम्भसः of the saltwater ocean, दक्षिणात् from the South, उत्तरं पारम् towards northern shore, प्रार्थयन् desiring, तं शैलेन्द्रम् that king of mountains, आरुह्य having ascended, व्यवर्धत started enlarging body.  
5::56::24::ततः then, वीरः hero, पवनात्मजः son of the Windgod, पर्वतम् mountain, अधिरुह्य having ascended, मीनोरगनिषेवितम् inhabited by fishes and sankes, भीमम् dreadful, सागरम् ocean, ददर्श saw. 
5::56::25::मारुतस्य Windgod's, आत्मसम्भवः son, सः हरिशार्दूलः that tiger among monkeys, दक्षिणात् from the south, उत्तरांदिशम् towards northern side, मारुतः इव like the windgod, आकाशम् sky, प्रपेदे leaped. 
5::56::26::तदा then, तेन कपिना by that vanara, पीडितः pressed, सः पर्वतोत्तमः that great mountain, तैः those, भूतैः सह along with the creatures, वसुधातलम् to the earth, प्रविशन् while entering, कम्पमानैः with shaking, शिखरैः with peaks, पतद्भिः with dropped, द्रुमैः with trees, ररास crushed down making great sound. 
5::56::27::तस्य his, ऊरुवेगात् with the force of his thighs, मथिताः shaken, पुष्पशालिनः trees with blossoms, पादपाः trees, रुग्णाः men suffering with diseases, शक्रायुधहता इव as if struck by Indra's thunderbolt, भूतले on the ground, निपेतुः fell. 
5::56::28::कन्दरान्तरसंस्थानाम् of those residing in mountain caves, पीडितानाम् of those crushed, महौजसाम् of the powerful ones, सिंहानाम् of lions, भीमः terrific, सः निनदः that noise, नभः sky, भिन्दन् as if breaking, शुश्रुवे was heard. 
5::56::29::विद्याधर्यः Vidyadharis, त्रस्तव्यावृत्तवसनाः with their clothes slipped with fear, व्याकुलीकृतभूषणाः with ornaments disarrayed, सहसा at ones, धरणीधरात् from the mountain, समुत्पेतुः flew.
5::56::30::अतिप्रमाणाः very big ones in size, बलिनः strong ones, दीप्तजिह्वाः with glowing tongues, महाविषाः highly poisonous, महाहयः huge snakes, निपीडितशिरोग्रीवाः pressed on their heads and necks, व्यचेष्टन्त started protruding. 
5::56::31::तदा then, किन्नरोरगगन्धर्वयक्षविद्याधराः kinnaras, uragas, gandharvas, yakshas and vidyadharas, पीडितम् tormented, तं नगवरम् that mountain, त्यक्त्वा having left, गगनम् to the sky, आस्थिताः occupied. 
5::56::32::बलिना by the powerful one, तेन by him, पीडितः crushed, सवृक्षशिखरोदग्रः along with its trees and standing tall peaks, श्रीमान् prosperous, सः भूमिधरश्च that mountain, रसातलम् underworld, प्रविवेश entered. 
5::56::33::दशयोजनविस्तारः ten yojanas in width, त्रिंशद्योजनम् thirty yojanas, उच्छ्रितः in height, सः धराधरः that mountain, धरण्याम् along with, समताम् equal, यातः reduced, बभूव became.
5::56::34::सः हरिः that vanara, भीमम् terrific, कल्लोलास्फालवेलान्तम् with huge waves dashing towards the shore, लवणार्णवम् ocean of saltwater, सलीलम् easily, लिलङ्घयिषुः desiring to cross, नभः sky, उत्पपात leaped. 
