5::32::1::Sita got perplexed on seeing him (Hanuman), who was tawny in complexion and looked like a cluster of lightnings, clad in white  and hidden in between the branches.
5::32::2::There (on the tree) she noticed a monkey like a cluster of fully blossomed Ashoka flower, shining bright, whose eyes were glowing like pure molten gold, speaking softly and pleasingly.
5::32::3::Astonisted Mythili began thinking. 'Oh this vanara's appearance is frightening. He is terrible to look at. He is inaccessible'. Thinking over this again and again, she fainted.
5::32::4::Overcome with sorrow and fear, noble Sita sobbed pitiably muttering repeatedly. 'O Rama, O Rama, O Lakshmana'.
5::32::5::Noble Sita, seeing the best of vanaras who stood near humbly, began reflecting 'Is this a dream'?
5::32::6::Looking here and there, she saw a monkey with a large, curved face, an obedient servant and a minister of the monkeylord, the foremost among the intelligentia and the son of the Windgod. 
5::32::7::The largeeyed Sita lost her senses looking at him. She got back her senses after a long time and started thinking again:
5::32::8::'Today I saw an ugly monkey in my dream. Its sight in a dream is inauspicious according to sastras. Let it be auspicious for Lakshmana and Rama for the sake of my father Janaka.
5::32::9::But no, it was not a dream for tormented by grief and sorrow I cannot have a dream. When separated from the moonfaced Rama I have no sleep or pleasure, how can I have dream?
5::32::10::I am always meditating upon Rama and thinking of him alone. I am talking about things related to him. Because of that I see him and hear him.
5::32::11::I am tormented by intense love for Rama, with all my thoughts immersed in him. Since I am constantly thinking of him I see him and hear words about him. (She thinks it is all hallucination.)
5::32::12::I feel it is only the desire in my mind. Desire has no form. But the one who is addressing me has a form. I cannot understand this.
5::32::13::My salutations to Indra, Brihaspati, Brahma the creator and also to the firegod. Let all those words spoken by the vanara here in front of me be true and not other than that.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे द्वात्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtysecond sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
