5::51::1::सत्त्ववान् courageous, हरिसत्तमः best of monkeys, महासत्त्वम् very powerful, तं दशाननम् the tenheaded, समीक्ष्य after observing, अव्यग्रम् slowly, अर्थवत् meaningful, वाक्यम् these words, तत् such, उवाच spoke.  
5::51::2::राक्षसेन्द्र O lord of demons, अहम् I am, सुग्रीवसंदेशात् by the orders of Sugriva, इह here, तव आलयम् your realm, प्राप्तः reached, भ्राता brotherlike, हरीशः lord of monkeys, त्वाम् to you, कुशलम् good wishes, अब्रवीत् spoke. 
5::51::3::महात्मनः the great self, भ्रातुः brother, सुग्रीवस्य Sugriva's, समादेशम् message, इह च pertinent to this world and, अमुत्र च in the other world, क्षमम् that which is beneficial, धर्मार्थोपहितम् consistent with righteousness and propriety, वाक्यम् words, शृणु you may listen. 
5::51::4::रथकुञ्जरवाजिमान् who was richly endowed with chariots, horses and elephants, बन्धु: friend, लोकस्य of this world, पितेव like a father, सुरेश्वरसमद्युतिः equal to Indra in splendour, दशरथो नाम named Dasaratha, राजा emperor. 
5::51::5::तस्य his, ज्येष्ठः पुत्रः eldest son, महाबाहुः strongarmed, प्रियकरः very dear, प्रभुः a lord, महातेजाः highly effulgent one, रामो नाम named Rama, धर्म्यम् righteous, पन्थानम् आस्थितः has entered a path, पितुः father's, निर्देशात् by order, निष्क्रान्तः went in exile, भ्रात्रा by his brother, लक्ष्मणेन with Lakshmana, भार्यया with his wife, सीतया चापि by Sita also, दण्डकावनम् Dandaka forest, प्रविष्टः entered. 
5::51::6::वैदेहस्य of Videha, महात्मनः  of the great self, जनकस्य Janka's, राज्ञः  king's, सुता daughter, पतिम् husband, अनुव्रता follwing, तस्य his, भार्या wife, सीता Sita, वने in the forest, नष्टा lost. 
5::51::7::तां देवीम् that divine lady, मार्गमाणः searching, सहानुजः along with his brother, सः राजपुत्रः that prince, ऋश्यमूकम् to Rshyamuka, अनुप्राप्तः reached, सुग्रीवेण with Sugriva, समागतः united. 
5::51::8::तेन by him, तस्य his, सीतायाः Sita's, परिमार्गणम् to search, प्रतिज्ञातम् is promised, रामेणापि even by Rama also, सुग्रीवस्य Sugriva's, हरिराज्यम् kingdom of monkeys, निवेदितम् assured. 
5::51::9::ततः then, तेन by him, राजपुत्रेण by the prince, वालिनम् Vali, मृधे in battle, हत्वा after killing, सुग्रीवः Sugriva, हर्यृऋक्षाणाम् kingdom of apes and bears, गणेश्वरः lord of the troops, राज्ये in kingdom, स्थापितः was established. 
5::51::10::वानरपुङ्गवः chief of vanaras, वाली Vali, त्वया by you, विज्ञातपूर्वश्च is known earlier, वानरः vanara, रामेण by Rama, सङ्ख्ये in a combat, एकेन by only one, शरेण with an arrow, निहतः is killed. 
5::51::11::सत्यसङ्गरः one who is a faithful warrior, हरीश्वरः  king of monkeys, सः सुग्रीवः that Sugriva, सीतामार्गणे in searching Sita, व्यग्रः was anxious, सर्वाः all, दिशः directions, हरीन् vanaras, सम्प्रेषयामास sent. 
5::51::12::हरीणाम् of monkeys, सहस्राणि in thousands, शतानि hundreds, नियुतानि च of unlimited numbers, ताम् her, सर्वासु in all, दिक्षु in directions, अधश्च underworld, उपरि in heavens, अम्बरे च in the sky, मार्गन्ते are searching.
5::51::13::तत्र there, महाबलाः very powerful, केचित् some, हरिवीराः heroic vanaras, वैनतेयसमाः like Vainateya (Garuda), केचित् a few, अनिलोपमाः are like the Windgod, शीघ्राः swiftfooted warriors, असङ्गगतयः went without touching the earth. 
5::51::14::मारुतस्य Maruta's, औरसः सुतः own son, हनुमान्नाम Hanuman by name, अहं तु I too, सीतायाः कृते for Sita, तूर्णम् swiftly, शतयोजनम् a hundred yojanas, आयतम् broad, समुद्रम् ocean, लङ्घयित्वैव  leaping, ताम् her, दिदृक्षुः  desirous of seeing, इह here, आगतः came. 
5::51::15::भ्रमता while roaming, मया by myself, ते your, गृहे in house, जनकात्मजा Janaka's daughter, दृष्टा saw, भवान् you, दृष्टधर्मार्थः knower of the truth of righteousness, तपः कृतपरिग्रहः carried out great austerities, तत् such, महाप्राज्ञ very wise person, त्वम् you, परदारान् another man's wife, उपरोद्धुम् to abduct, न अर्हसि  it does not behove you. 
5::51::16::भवद्विधाः respectable people like you, बुद्धिमन्तः wise men, धर्मविरुद्धेषु acts which are unrighteous, बह्वपायेषु indulge in such actions, मूलघातिषु  striking at the very root, कर्मसु in actions, न सज्जन्ते हि do not involve indeed.  
5::51::17::लक्ष्मणमुक्तानाम् released by Lakshmana, रामकोपानुवर्तिनाम् following Rama's wrath, शराणाम् of those arrows, अग्रतः in front, स्थातुम् to stand, देवासुरेष्वपि even among gods and asuras, कः who, शक्त: has power. 
5::51::18::राजन् O king, यः whoever, राघवस्य Rama's, व्यलीकम् displeasure, कृत्वा after doing, सुखम् happiness, अवाप्नुयात् can experience, त्रिषु in the three, लोकेषु in worlds, कश्चन who, न विद्येत may not be there. 
5::51::19::तत् that, त्रिकालहितम् good for all three times, past present and future, धर्म्यम् is righteous, अर्थानुबन्धि च and provide you material wealth, वाक्यम् these words, मन्यस्व think, नरदेवाय to the lord of the people, जानकी Janaki, प्रतिदीयताम् return.  
5::51::20::मया by me, इयं देवी this divine lady, दृष्टा हि indeed seen, यत् such, दुर्लभम् difficult, इह here, लब्धम् attained, उत्तरम् in future, यत् such, कर्म action, शेषम् remaining, तत्र there, राघवः Rama, निमित्तम् may plan. 
5::51::21::तथा like that, शोकपरायणा immersed in deep sorrow, इयं सीता this Sita, मया by me, लक्षिता is seen, पञ्चास्याम् five hooded, पन्नगीमिव like a female serpent, याम् whom, गृह्य after abducting, नाभिजानासि you do not realise. 
5::51::22::अत्यर्थम् excessive, विषसंसृष्टम् mixed with poison, भुक्तम् eaten, अन्नमिव like food, इयम् this, सासुरैः including asuras, अमरैरपि even gods, ओजसा absorb, जरयितुम् to weaken, न शक्या not possible.
5::51::23::तपस्सन्तापलब्ध: obtained by the the virtue of austerity, ते to you, यः that, अयम् this, धर्मपरिग्रहः accumlation of righteousness, आत्मप्राणपरिग्रहः at the cost of your life, सः that, नाशयितुम् to destroy, न न्याय्यः not proper.   
5::51::24::भवान् your self, तपोभिः with austerities, आत्मनः of yourself, सासुरैः including asuras, देवैः by devas, याम् whom, अवध्यताम् not to be killed, समनुपश्यसि you see, तत्रापि even then, अयम् this, महान् great, हेतुः cause. 
5::51::25::अयं सुग्रीवः this Sugriva, न हि not indeed, असुरः च an asura, राक्षसः च न not a demon, दानवः न not danava, गन्धर्वः न not a gandharva, यक्षः न not a yaksha, पन्नगश्च न not a pannga, राजन् O king, तस्मात् therefore, प्राणपरित्राणम् to protect your life, कथम् how, करिष्यसि you will do.  
5::51::26::धर्मोपसंहारम् exceeding rigteousness, अधर्मफलसंहितम् yields results of unrighteousness, न तु not, तत् that, फलमेव result itself, अन्वेति follows, धर्मश्च righteousness, अधर्मनाशनः will destroy unrighteousness. 
5::51::27::भवता by you, धर्मफलम् merits earned through righteousness, प्राप्तं तावत् you reaped, अत्र here, संशयः no doubt, न not, अस्य of this, अधर्मस्य of unrighteousness, फलमपि result also, क्षिप्रमेव quickly, प्रपत्स्यसे reap 
5::51::28::जनस्थानवधम् killing of all ogres at Janasthana, बुद्ध्वा after realising, तथा that way, वालिवधम् killing of Vali, बुद्ध्वा after realising, रामसुग्रीवसख्यं च alliance of Rama and Sugriva also, आत्मनः your own, हितम् benefit, बुध्यस्व know (Judge and adopt suitable course of action.) 
5::51::29:: अहम् I, एकोऽपि all alone also, सवाजिरथकुञ्जराम् full of horses, chariots and elephants, लङ्काम् Lanka, नाशयितुम् to destroy, कामम् indeed, शक्तः खलु I have the energy, एषः this, तु indeed, निश्चयः resolution, न not. 
5::51::30::रामेण by Rama, हर्यृक्षगणसन्निधौ in the presence of bears and vanaras, यैः by those, सीता Sita, प्रधर्षिता is troubled, अमित्राणाम् of enemy troops, उत्सादनम् exterminate, प्रतिज्ञातं हि indeed made a vow.  
5::51::31::रामस्य to Rama, अपकुर्वन् while offending, साक्षात् personally, पुरन्दरः अपि even the destroyer of enemy citadel, Indra, सुखम् happiness, नप्राप्नुयात् will not have, त्वद्विधः people like you, किं पुनः what to say again. 
5::51::32::याम् whom, सीता इति as Sita, अभिजानासि know, या इयम् whosoever, ते वशे under your custody, तिष्ठति stays, ताम् her, सर्वलङ्काविनाशिनीम् destroyer of the entire Lanka, कालरात्रीति the dark night of dissolution, विद्धि you may know. 
5::51::33::तत् therefore, सीताविग्रहरूपिणा in the form of Sita, स्वयम् personally, स्कन्धावसक्तेन on your shoulder, कालपाशेन by the noose of death, अलम् enough, आत्मनि for your sake, क्षेमम् welfare, चिन्त्यताम् think over. 
5::51::34::Sita's, तेजसा by the glowing fire, दग्धाम् burnt, रामकोपप्रपीडिताम् pressed by Rama's wrath, दह्यमानाम् being burnt, साट्टप्रतोलिकाम् including its marketplaces and streets, इमाम् of this, पुरीम् city, पश्य see. 
5::51::35::स्वानि your, मित्राणि friends, मन्त्रींश्च ministers, ज्ञातीन् clan, भ्रात्रून् brothers and sisters, सुतान् sons, हितान् wellwishers, भोगान् pleasures, दारांश्च and wives, लङ्कां च and Lanka, विनाशम् destruction, मा उपानय do not lead. 
5::51::36::राक्षसराजेन्द्र O king of demons, रामदासस्य of Rama's servant, दूतस्य of a messenger's, विशेषतः specially, वानरस्य of a vanara, मम my, सत्यम् true, वचनम् word, शृणुष्व listen. 
5::51::37::महायशाः illustrious, रामः Rama, सभूतान् including all creatures, सचराचरान् including movables and immovable, सर्वान् all, लोकान् worlds, सुसंहृत्य after putting an end, पुनरेव once again, तथा in the same way, स्रष्टुम् to recreate, शक्तः has the power. 
5::51::38::विष्णुतुल्यपराक्रमम् equal to Visnu in valour, रामम् Rama, यः whoever, प्रतियुध्येत may combat, सः he, देवासुरनरेन्द्रेषु among the kings of gods and asuras, यक्षरक्षोगणेषु च even among yakshas and rakshasas, सर्वेषु among all, विद्याधरेषु in vidyadharas, गन्धर्वेषु gandharvas, उरगेषु च even among uragas, सिद्धेषु among siddhas, किन्नरेन्द्रेषु among kings of kinnaras, सर्वतः all over, पतत्रिषु among birds, सर्वभूतेषु in all beings, सर्वत्र at all places, सर्वकालेषु at all times, नास्ति not there.
5::51::39::सर्वलोकेश्वरस्य of the lord of all worlds, राजसिंहस्य of a lion among kings, रामस्य Rama's, एवम् in this, उत्तमम् great, विप्रियम् offence, कृत्वा having done, तव your, जीवितम् life, दुर्लभम् is difficult to sustain. 
5::51::40::निशाचरेन्द्र O king of demons, देवाश्च even devas, दैत्याश्च daityas, गन्धर्वविद्याधरनागयक्षाः gandharvas, vidyadharas, nagas and yakshas, सर्वे all, लोकत्रयनायकस्य of the lord of the three worlds, रामस्य Rama's, समरेषु in war, स्थातुम् to face his challenge, न शक्ताः do not have the power. 
5::51::41::युधि in war, रामवध्यम्  deemed to be killed by Rama, स्वयंभूः selfborn Brahma, चतुराननः fourfaced one, ब्रह्मा वा even Brahma also, त्रिणेत्रः threeeyed Siva, त्रिपुरान्तकः killer of the demon Tripura, रुद्रो वा or even Rudra, इन्द्रः Indra, सुरनायकः king of suras, महेन्द्रः वा or even Mahendra, त्रातुम् to save, न शक्ताः do not have the power. 
5::51::42::अप्रतिमः unequal in strength, सः दशाननः that tenheaded one, अदीनवादिनः of Hanuman who expressed his opinion with all dignity, कपेः of a vanara, सौष्ठवोपेतम् in an extremely skilful manner, अप्रियम् unplesant, वचः words, निशम्य after hearing, कोपविवृत्तलोचनः eyes rolling in anger, तस्य his, महाकपेः of great Hanuman, वधम् death, समादिशत् ordered. 
