5::5::1::Then intelligent Hanuman observed the Moon in the central part of the sky spreading a canopy of his luminescence like the Sun, and looking like an intoxicated mighty (white) bull moving in a stable.
5::5::2::While moving forward, Hanuman saw the Moon spreading his light, thereby warding off the agony of all creatures, causing the swelling of the ocean and illuminating the earth as well as the sky.
5::5::3::'The  same splendour on the Mandara mountain on earth, which glows at dusk lay on the ocean is there, on lotuses in the lakes and on the beautiful Moon also. 
5::5::4::'Like a swan in a cage of silver, like a lion in a cave of Mandara mountain, like a hero on a proud, intoxicated elephant, the Moon shone in the sky.  
5::5::5::The fullmoon with its hornlike spot  shone like a bull with sharp horns, like the  white Himalayan mountain with its lofty peaks, and like an elephant with gold plated tusks
5::5::6::With the Sun, the great planet (star), destroying the frost that forms the dew, the Moon with its stain shone with graceful radiance.
5::5::7::The Moon shone bright like a lion mounted on a rock, like a lordly elephant in a deep forest, like a king on attaining the kingdom.
5::5::8::At  the time of moonrise, the darkness of dusk is dispelled, the dark deeds of cannibals disappear, the natural instinct for love returns to women as the radiance of the Moon spreads everywhere like in heaven. 
5::5::9::Pleasing sounds of string instruments had begun to be heard. Chaste women were found asleep with their husbands.The nightrangers had begun their strange (evil and cruel) deeds exhibiting their anger.
5::5::10::Intelligent Hanuman, the great warrior, observed there in the prosperous mansions, demons proud of their wealth, highly intoxicated and dull, their houses full of horsedrawn chariots with comfortable seats.
5::5::11::The intoxicated demons were quarrelling, ridiculing one another bitterly and wildly throwing their stout arms on one another, indulging in incoherent talk, uttering vulgar words.
5::5::12::The demons were seen expanding their chests sportively and caressing their wives by placing their limbs on them. They were assuming wonderful forms, and drawing their bows up to their ears.
5::5::13::He even saw women collected there, their limbs smeared with unguents on their bodies, like wise women with beautiful countenances laughing at others, some sleeping, and others hissing (sighing) like angry serpents.
5::5::14::There were huge elephants trumpeting, respected people, warriors sighing for the lack of enemies (to vanquish). It had a lake infested with hissing snakes.
5::5::15::He saw there in the city of Lanka, demons, who were intellectuals, pleasing in words, with faith in religion, preeminent heroes of the world  of different kinds, followers of good practices and with lovely names.
5::5::16::He rejoiced to see the handsome demons radiant with forms commensurate with their virtues. He also saw some ugly figures, their traits in conformity to their forms.
5::5::17::There he saw demonesses adorned with choicest ornaments, their minds attached faithfully to their husbands and bottles of wine. Some of the wives of the demons, however, looked gentle and bright like stars.
5::5::18::There he saw cheerful demonesses shining brightly, abashed by the embrace of their beloveds during the night. He also saw those sporting with their beloveds freely and looking like birds embracing flowers.
5::5::19::Intelligent Hanuman saw demonesses seated happily on the laps of their beloved ones on the terraces of the mansions, exhibiting their attachment to one another,  overwhelmed with sexual pleasure.
5::5::20::Ogresses without veil, some altruistic, some separated from their husbands looked pale like the Moon, though possessed of  polished gold complexion.
5::5::21::That heroic monkey saw ogresses delighted in the happy company of their loved ones who have joined them, ecstatic wives in the houses.
5::5::22::He saw rows of faces of shedemons shining like moonlight with sidelong glances and graceful eyelashes wearing ornaments resembling charmimg flashes of lightning.
5::5::23::Hanuman could not find Sita  anywhere, an excellent lady  born in a noble royal family, adopting the right path, a lady  delicate like a blossoming creeper of good breed, or so he imagined.
5::5::24::'Sita must have had a pair of beautiful eyes. She must have been a passionate lady with mind fixed on her glorious husband. Ever established in dharma, she is perhaps a distinguished lady compared to her counterparts (in Lanka).
5::5::25::She whose neck  was adorned with costly ornaments earlier must be shedding hot tears now, her throat choked with grief. With her beautiful eyelashes and a sweet loving voice, she would be now like a  peahen wandering in the woods.
5::5::26::She would be like a barely visible ray of the Moon, like a streak of gold covered with dust, like an unhealed scar of a wound caused by an arrow only superficially covered and like a flake of cloud swept off by the wind.
5::5::27::Hanuman stood griefstricken, having (unsuccessfully) searched for a long time for the wife of Rama, the lord of men. The highly eloquent was now despondent. For a while he looked dull and dejected.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fifth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
