5::28::1::After hearing the unpleasant words spoken by the king of demons, which caused restlessness and sorrow to Sita, she was terrified like the young calf of a lordly elephant fallen into the clutches of a lion in the midst of the forest.
5::28::2::Encircled by the demonesses, Sita was repeatedly humiliated by Ravana's cruel words. She wept like a young girl deserted in a desolate forest.
5::28::3::Even though I am threatened like this, I am living pitiably because of lack of merit. Indeed I regret my survival due to my bad luck. Elders say that death will not ocurr before its time. It seems to be true.
5::28::4::Even though I am devoid of joy, and living in deep agony, my heart bursts not into a thousand pieces like the summit of a mountain hit by thunderbolt (lightning).
5::28::5::I will not be blamed if I commit suicide now.I stand condemned to death in the hands of this ugly Ravana. I cannot bestow my affection on him or surender to his desire like a brahmin would not like to impart Vedic knowledge to a nonbrahmin. (Better die of my own accord than be killed by a sinful ogre).
5::28::6::If the lord of the world does not come here before that (time fixed by Ravana) the vile lord of demons will cut me into pieces with weapons just as a barber would cut to pieces the foetus with a sharp knife (in order to save a pregnant woman).
5::28::7::
5::28::8::
5::28::9::Just like two mighty lions are killed by a bolt of lightning, the two princes must have been killed by a creature in the guise of a deer on my account.
5::28::10::Verily, it is the spirit of the time that assumed the form of deer and tempted this unfortunate soul. It was foolish of me to send away, the sons of a noble king, Lakshmana and his elder brother.
5::28::11::
5::28::12::I am devoted to you and to no other god. My hardship in sleeping on the ground, my righteousness, my discipline and chastity have all proved futile like the devotion of an ungrateful person.
5::28::13::This righteousnes practised by me is in vain like my devotion to you, as I am unable to see you. I am a separated, emaciated, pale with no hope of reuniting with you. 
5::28::14::Having truly fulfilled your pledge given to your father, you will return from the forest to Ayodhya, rid of all fear, as an accomplished person, will and revel in the company of largeeyed damsels, I think.
5::28::15::O RamaI loved you and concentrated all my love on you for a long time only for my doom. I have observed vows and austerities in vain. I cannot continue it for long. Here I am giving up my life. Fie upon this luckless one (me).
5::28::16::I will end my life at once by taking poison or else by a sharp weapon. Alas There is none to give get me poison or a weapon at this demon's residence.
5::28::17::Queen Sita was wailing in many ways, constantly remembering Rama, the soul of all. Shivering, her face pales as she approached the great Simsupa tree in bloom.
5::28::18::Burning in grief, worrying in many ways, Sita took hold of her braid and said, by tying myself with this braid I shall quickly reach the presence of the lord of death.
5::28::19::Sita of delicate limbs approached the Simsupa tree and held on to a branch and stood. While she was thinking of Rama and Lakshmana and their noble family many  omens of proven results appeared on her auspicious charming body. These omens were dispellers of grief, and harbingers of courage in the world as declared from ancient times. (Now) they manifested themselves.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे अष्टाविंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the twentyeigth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
