5::25::1:: On hearing the many harsh words of dire threat by the ugly ogresses, the daughter of Janaka wept.
5::25::2::In reply to the ogresses who thus spoke, noble Vaidehi, terribly frightened, said in a voice choked with tears. 
5::25::3::
5::25::4::Surrounded by the ogresses, distressed Sita, who was like the daughter of a divine, did not get any solace.
5::25::5::'Like a doe that strayed from the herd in the forest and tormented by  wolves around, Sita had withdrawn into herself all her limbs through fear, she was trembling excessively.
5::25::6::Laying hold on a large blossoming branch of the Ashoka tree, Sita thought of her husband with a broken heart.
5::25::7::Her large breasts bathed with the flow of tears, she continued to brood over her plight  and found no end to it.
5::25::8::Trembling like a banana tree uprooted by the stormy wind, Sita who was seized with fear of the ogresses looked pale and desperate. 
5::25::9::The long, luxuriant braid of hair of the trembling Sita waving (in the wind), appeared like a crawling female serpent.
5::25::10::The distressed Mythili, her consciousness drowned in grief, sighing, shed streams of tears. 
5::25::11::'The bright, beautiful Sita began to wail, alas, Rama alas, Lakshmana alas, my motherinlaw, Kausalya alas, Sumitra
5::25::12::'There is a famous popular saying among the learned that untimely death is not possible  either for a woman or a man.It is true that I am living in this miserable condition, deprived of Rama's company and tormented by these cruel ogresses here. Living in such conditions even for a moment is impossible. But nobody dies an untimely death.
5::25::13::'I am a woman of low merit, a wretched woman, an orphan. I will be ruined like the loaded boat that gets hit in the midst of the ocean by the stormy wind.
5::25::14::'Unable to find my husband and seized by these ogresses, I am collapsing on account of grief like a riverbank under the current of water.
5::25::15::'Blessed are those who are in touch with my husband with eyes like lotus petals, whose walk is majestic like a lion's, who has a sense of gratitude and is pleasing in words.
5::25::16::'Separated from Rama endowed with selfknowledge, it is impossible for me to live like one who has drunk venom.
5::25::17::'I do not know what great sin I have committed in my past life for which I experience this terrific, cruel affliction?  
5::25::18::'I long to give up my life, afflicted with great grief, as I, wellguarded by these ogresses, have no hope  to reach Rama.
5::25::19::'Fie upon this human life. Fie upon this dependence. What a pitiable situation I am placed in. It is not possible for me, a human, to give up life at my free will.'           इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चविंशस्सर्गः।Thus ends the twentyfifth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
