5::50::1::The mighty armed Ravana, a tormentor of all worlds, overcome with anger beheld the tawnyeyed brilliant lord of monkeys who stood before him and started thinking in his mind full of apprehensions.     
5::50::2::'Is he Lord Nandi who came here in person? I was earlier cursed by him when I shook the mount Kailasa in the past. Could he have assumed a monkeyform or may be he is the great demon Bana. (Nandi is the bull, the vehicle of Lord Siva).
5::50::3::The infuriated demon king told the great minister Prahasta, these  profound words in a brief manner appropriate to the hour. 
5::50::4::Enquire from this wicked one, why he has come and from where, Why he destroyed the garden and for what purpose he threatened the demonesses?
5::50::5::Enquire why this wicked one entered this inviolable city and for what purpose did he wage a war
5::50::6::On hearing Ravana, Prahasta spoke these words boosting the monkey's morale 'O monkey Be relaxed. Feel safe. You need not entertain any fear.
5::50::7::Have you came to the abode of Ravana sent by Indra? Speak the truth. Be not afraid.You will be released.
5::50::8::
5::50::9::Your appearance is only of that of a vanara. But your glow is not of a vanara indeed. Tell the truth today. You will be set free.
5::50::10::If you tell a lie, it will be difficult for you to live. Or else, tell me for what reason have you entered the abode of Ravana.'
5::50::11::The foremost of the vanaras spoke to the lord of ogres in response to the equiries made to him: I have not come from Indra or Yama or Varuna. I have no friendship with Kubera. I have not been sent by Visnu. By birth I am vanara and I have come here.'
5::50::12::
5::50::13::Desiring to fight with me the powerful ogres came. Then I fought in self defence.
5::50::14::It is not possible to bind me with any bondage of astras even by devas or danavas. Such a boon has been granted to me by Grandfather Brahma.
5::50::15::Wishing to see the king I honoured this astra and not otherwise. Even though I was tormented by the ogres and released by the astra I submitted to you as I have a small work assigned by the king.
5::50::16::Know that I am a messenger of the highly powerful Rama. O lord please listen to these beneficial words of mine meant for your welfare.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftieth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
