5::31::1::After deliberating in several ways the great Hanuman spoke these sweet words to Vaidehi:
5::31::2::There was an illustrious king called Dasaratha in Ikshvaku race, a master of chariots, elephants and horses. He was highly meritorious and renowned.
5::31::3:: He was the most virtuous among royal sages, equal to sages in austerity, born in the race of emperors and equal to Indra in might.
5::31::4::He was committed to nonviolence, magnanimous, compassionate and one whose strength was truth. He was not only a prosperous king of Ikshvaku family but also a promoter of prosperity of others too.
5::31::5::Endowed with signs of kingship and vast wealth, he was a bull among rulers of the vast earth, surrounded by the sea. A happy king himself, he was wellknown as a provider of happiness.
5::31::6::His beloved eldest son Rama, whose countenance is like the full moon, is a scholar of all branches of knowledge and is foremost among the bowmen on earth. 
5::31::7::The scourage of enemies, he is a protector of righteousness and of his kins and all living creatures. He is an embodiment of righteousness. 
5::31::8::Honouring the word of his aged father who was ever steadfast in truth, Rama left for the forest along with his wife and brother.
5::31::9::In the deep forest he went round hunting animals and killing the demon warriors who assumed any form at their free will.
5::31::10::Ravana having heard about the killing of all demons at Janasthana including Khara and Dooshana in the forest, deceived Rama in the guise of a deer and abducted Janaki in anger.
5::31::11::While looking for the goddesslike lady, the sinless Sita in the forest, Rama met a monkey called Sugriva and made friendship with him
5::31::12::Rama, a powerful king, who can win enemy forts killed Vali and offered the monkey kingdom to Sugriva.
5::31::13::Having received Sugriva's orders thousands of monkeys who can assume any form went searching for that divine queen in all directions.
5::31::14:: On hearing the words of Sampati I leaped the wide ocean swiftly crossing a hundred yojanas in quest of the largeeyed Sita.
5::31::15::Surely I have seen here a lady of similar body, of similar complexion, of similar glow and beauty as described by Rama.
5::31::16::Having spoken thus, the great vanara stopped speaking after that. Janaki was wonderstruck by the words of the vanara.
5::31::17::Then Sita looked up at the Simsupa tree timidly, her face covered with beautiful curly hair.
5::31::18::On hearing Hanuman's words Sita looked at all directions and quarters while quietly contemplating on Rama, the self of all and experienced supreme joy.
5::31::19::She looked obliquely, up, and down and saw Hanuman of unimaginable intelligence, the minister of the monkey lord, son of the Windgod, who looked like the rising Sun.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyfirst sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
