5::44::1::Commanded  by the demon king, Jambumali the invincible son of Prahasta, who had large teeth in front, big rolling eyes, red flower garland, red robes and a chaplet with beautiful earrings. He went round twanging his producing thunderous sound. His arrows were huge, shining and beautiful.
5::44::2::All directions including the intermediate directions and the sky were filled with that loud sound produced by his twang.
5::44::3::Seeing him coming in a chariot drawn by donkeys, Hanuman who was swift to act was glad (to have an opportunity to fight) and made a loud noise.
5::44::4::Strongarmed Jambumali with his sharp arrows hit great Hanuman who stood on top of the exit archway.
5::44::5::Jambumali released a crescentshaped arrow on the face, one earshaped (barbed) arrow on the head and ten iron arrows into the arms of the lord of monkeys.
5::44::6::His red face struck by an arrow appeared like a fullblown lotus in autumn season hit  by  the rays of the Sun.
5::44::7::His red face  stained with blood was glowing bright like red lotus in the sky sprinkled with drops of red sandal. 
5::44::8:: Struck by the shafts of the ogre, the great monkey was enraged and happened to see a huge,  heavy rock lying beside him on the ground.
5::44::9:: Powerful Hanuman with all vehemence lifted the rock and hurled it at the giant which he angrily smashed with ten arrows.
5::44::10::Hanuman, a strong, powerful and fierce warrior pulled out a sala tree and whirled it. Seeing that his attempt has failed.
5::44::11::Gigantic Jambumali seeing the mighty Hanuman whirling the sala tree fired many arrows at him. 
5::44::12::He struck the sala tree with four arows, the arm of Hanuman with five arrows, chest with one, the hollow of the chest with ten more arrows.
5::44::13::Hanuman filled with arrows all over his body, seized an iron spear (which he made use of in the initial battle) and impetuously spun it in  intense anger.
5::44::14::Hanuman of immeasurable strength hurled the iron spear after turning it round and round at high speed on the broad chest of Jambumali. 
5::44::15::Neither his head could be discerned nor his arms, knees, nor bow, chariot nor donkeys. Nothing was seen. 
5::44::16::Mighty Jambumali killed  by that blow dropped down dead at once with his ornaments reduced to powder. 
5::44::17::Ravana's eyes became bloodshot in anger when he heard about the death of Jambumali and of the strong army of kinkaras.
5::44::18::When the mighty son of Prahasta was killed, infuriated Ravana, his eyes red and rolling, commanded the highly valiant sons of ministers.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे चतुश्चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyfourth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
