5::49::1::The highly courageous Hanuman, astonished at  the  action (of binding and dragging him to the court) by the demon king looked at him with eyes turned red in anger.
5::49::2::(Hanuman looked at Ravana) of innate splendour, who shone with a glittering crown of gold glowing, encircled with strings of pearls.
5::49::3::He was decked with wonderful golden ornaments studded with diamonds and had small motifs of precious gems fixed to them. They were as though designed by imagination. (An ornament made with the hand connot be so fine and delicate.)
5::49::4::He was dressed in exquisite silk and smeared with red sandal paste and had many ornamental designs drawn on his body with fragrant unguents.
5::49::5::He appeared terrible with bloodred eyes, shining sharp big teeth, drooping lips and ten heads, which looked like ten peaks of mountain Mandara inhabited by various beasts. He was heroic, powerful and splendid.
5::49::6::He was like a black mountain of collyrium, and with a face like the fullmoon. With a pearl necklace illumining his chest he appeared like a cloud lit up by the fullmoon with white cranes flying across. (The white pearlnecklace moving on his chest appeared like a row of cranes flying through the black cloud.)    
5::49::7::Adorned with armlets (keyura), smeared with choicest sandal paste, his shining, stout armlets appeared like many fivehooded serpents (fingers appearing like hoods).
5::49::8::(He was) seated on a huge magnificent throne of crystal encrusted with precious stones and overspread with a wonderful carpet.
5::49::9::Young and beautiful girls decorated exceedingly well holding whisks all over the vicinity attended on him. 
5::49::10::He was attended by Durdhara, Prahasta, Mahaparsva and Nikumbha who were his learned ministers. Seated comfortably and attended by the four arrogant ministers, he was puffed with pride of their strength and appeared like the entire world surrounded by four oceans.
5::49::11::He was attended by ogres including ministers who were intellectuals and adept in counselling. He appeared like lord Indra attended by the gods.
5::49::12::Hanuman saw the highly resplendent giant king (seated on the throne) who appeared like a cloud laden with water appearing on the peak of mount Meru.   
5::49::13::Hanuman looked at the demon king with great amazement even while he was dealt harshly by the demons of fierce valour.
5::49::14::Seeing the splendour of the lord of demons, Hanuman was dimayed and started thinking thus:
5::49::15::'Oh what charm what courage what strength what splendour How great is this demonking, an endowment of all merits.
5::49::16::'If only this lord of demons was not unrighteous, he could have become even the lord (protector) of gods including Indra.
5::49::17::'This Ravana has done many cruel, fierce and contemptible deeds. That is why even the demons, gods and all the people of this world get scared of him. He will render the entire world into a single ocean when he turns angry'.
5::49::18::Many such thoughts crossed Hanuman's intelligent mind on seeing Ravana's brilliance and power.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकोनपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyninth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
