5::65::1::ततः thereafter, ते they, चित्रकाननम् wonderful forest of Chitra, प्रस्रवणम् शैलम् to Prasravana mount, युवराजम् heir apparent, पुरस्कृत्य placing in front with respect, गत्वा having arrived, रामम् to Rama, महाबलम् mighty, लक्ष्मणं च and Lakshmana, शिरसा bowed down, प्रणम्य offered salutations, सुग्रीवम् to Sugriva, अभिवाद्य च offered obeisance, अथ and then, सीतायाः  regarding Sita's, प्रवृत्तिम् state, प्रवक्तुम् to tell, उपचक्रमुः began. 
5::65::2::सर्वे all, ते हरयः those vanaras, रावणान्तः पुरे in the chambers of Ravana, रोधम् detention, राक्षसीभिः ogresses, तर्जनं च threatening, रामे to Rama, समनुरागं च her devotion, यः that which, अयम् thus, समयः time limit, कृतः set, एतत् all that, रामसन्निधौ in Rama's presence, आख्यान्ति told. 
5::65::3::वैदेहीम् Vaidehi, अक्षताम् not harmed, श्रुत्वा hearing, रामस्तु Rama too, उत्तरम् responded, अब्रवीत् asked, देवी divine lady, सीता Sita, क्व tell me, वर्तते she is, मयि to me, कथम् how, वर्तते is she, वानराः vanara, वैदेहीं प्रति her disposition towards, एतत् all that, सर्वम् every thing, मे to me, आख्यात asked. 
5::65::4::हरयः vanaras,रामस्य Rama's, गदितम् words spoken, श्रुत्वा hearing, सीतावृत्तान्तकोविदम् who was aware of Sita's position, हनूमन्तम् Hanuman, रामसन्निधौ in the presence of Rama, चोदयन्ति requested to tell. 
5::65::5::मारुतात्मजः son of the Windgod, वाक्यज्ञः wise in speech, हनुमान् Hanuman, तेषाम् their, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा hearing, देव्यै to the divine lady, सीतायै Sita, तां दिशं प्रति to the direction in which she was located, शिरसा with head down, प्रणम्य offered salutations, सीतायाः about Sita's, दर्शनम् finding, यथा these, वाक्यम् words, उवाच spoke.
5::65::6::अहम् I, शतयोजनम् a hundred yojanas, आयतम् wide, समुद्रम् ocean, लङ्घयित्वा having crossed, जानकीम् Janaki,सीताम् Sita, मार्गमाणः searching, दिदृक्षया with the intention of seeing, आगच्छम् reached. 
5::65::7::तत्र there, दक्षिणस्य समुद्रस्य on the southern side of the sea, दक्षिणे तीरे of the southern shore, दुरात्मनः evilminded, रावणस्य Ravana's, लङ्केति in Lanka, नगरी city, वसति there is. 
5::65::8::रामा Rama, तत्र there, रावणान्तः पुरे in the inner palace of Ravana, सती your wife, त्वयि your, मनोरथम्  her hopes, सन्न्यस्य giving up desires, जीवन्ती living, राम lovely, सीता Sita, मया by me, दृष्टा seen. 
5::65::9::प्रमदावने in that beautiful garden, विरूपाभिः hideous, राक्षसीभिः rakshasas, रक्षिता guarded, मुहुर्मुहुः again and again, तर्ज्यमाना threatening, मे I, राक्षसीमध्ये in the midst of ogresses, दृष्टा saw. 
5::65::10::तथा in that way, दुःखोचिता mind filled with grief, देवी divine lady, दुःखम्  grief, आपद्यते not deserve to experience, रावणान्तःपुरे  in the inner palace of Ravana, रुद्धा  detained, राक्षसीभि by ogresses, स्सुरक्षिता guarded by, एकवेणीधरा wearing a single braid( a mark of desolation),दीना pathetic, त्वयि your,सती wife,चिन्तापरायणा absorbed in your thought, अध: शय्या now lying on bare ground, हिमागमे in winter season, पद्मिनीव like the lotus, विवर्णाङ्गी  limbs turned pale, रावणात् by Ravana, विनिवृत्तार्था averse to Ravana, मर्तव्यकृन्तिश्चया determined to die, काकुत्स्थ Rama alone, त्वन्मनाः in her mind, देवी Sita, कथञ्चित्  somehow, मार्गिता found. 
5::65::11::अनघ sinless one, नरशार्दूल tiger among men, इक्ष्वाकुवंशविख्यातिम् all about the glory of Ikshvaku race, शनैः slowly, कीर्तयता praised, मया by me, सा she, विश्वासम् confidence, उपपादिता to inspire. 
5::65::12::ततः then, देवी divine lady, सम्भाषिता talked, सर्वम् all,अर्थम् all facts,दर्शिता presented to her, रामसुग्रीवसख्यं च about the alliance of Rama and Sugriva, श्रुत्वा on hearing, प्रीतिम् affectionately, उपागता became, अस्याः her, समुदाचारः virtuous, नियतः fixed, तथा so also, त्वयि towards, भक्तिश्च and devotion. 
5::65::13::पुरुषर्षभ bull among men, उग्रेण formidable, तपसा austerity, त्वद्भक्त्या devotion to you, युक्ता filled with, महाभागा prosperous, जनकनन्दिनी delight of Janaka, मया by me, एवम् that way, दृष्टा seen. 
5::65::14::महाप्राज्ञ very wise, चित्रकूटे in Chitrakuta, तव your, अन्तिके provided me, वायसं प्रति with an anecdote of a crow, यथा so also, वृत्तम् told, अभिज्ञानम् as an identification for you, मे to me, दत्तम् presented. 
5::65::15::वायुसुत son of the Windgod, नरव्याघ्रः tiger among men, रामः Rama, त्वया your, इह here, यत् that which, दृष्टम् seen, अखिलेन should tell, विज्ञाप्यः should let him know, इति thus, जानकी Janaki, माम् me, आह told. 
5::65::16::सुग्रीवस्य while Sugriva, उपशृण्वतः within hearing of, एवम् that way, वचनानि these words, ब्रुवता that I said, यत्नात् the efforts, सुपरिरक्षितः kept with great care, अयं च and I, अस्मै this, प्रदातव्यः be presented. 
5::65::17::श्रीमान् prosperous, एषः this, चूडामणिः Chudamani, मया by me, सुपरिरक्षितः very carefully preserved, तिलके red mark on the forehead, प्रणष्ठे when it was, त्वया by you, मनश्शिलायाः with the stone pigment, तिलकः mark on the forehead, गण्डपार्श्वे on my forehead, निवेशितः किल decorated indeed, तम् स्मर्तुम् remind him, अर्हसि is proper. 
5::65::18::अनघ sinless one, दिव्यः wonderful, एषः this, निर्यातितः sent to you, श्रीमान् prosperous one, वारिसम्भवः born in the ocean, व्यसने in sorrow, एतम् this (Chudamani), मया I, दृष्टवा gazing, त्वामिव you only, प्रहृष्यामि was feeling happy. 
5::65::19::दशरथात्मज Dasaratha's son, मासम् one month, जीवितम् living, धारयिष्यामि will hold on to, रक्षसाम् these demons, वशम् captivated by, आगता completion, मासात् after a month, ऊर्ध्वम् more than, न जीवेयम् will not live. 
5::65::20::कृशाङ्गी enfeebled lady, धर्मचारिणी following righteous ways, रावणान्तःपुरे in the inner palace of Ravana, रुद्धा detained मृगीव like a doe, उत्फुल्ललोचना eyes wide open in fear, सीता Sita, माम् to me, इति this, अब्रवीत् said. 
5::65::21::राघव Rama, यत् that which, यथा like that, एतत् happened, सर्वमेव every thing, मया by me, ख्यातम् has been said, सर्वथा ever, सागरजले water of the ocean, सन्तारः means to cross the ocean, प्रविधीयताम् pay attention to. 
5::65::22::वायुपुत्रः son of the Windgod, तौ राजपुत्त्रौ the two princes Rama and Lakshmana, जाताश्वासौ sighing in relief, विदित्वा knowing, तत् that, अभिज्ञानम् identification, राघवाय to Rama, प्रदाय communicated, देव्या by Sita, आख्यातम् having spoken, सर्वमेव everything, सम्पूर्णम् completely, आनुपूर्व्यात् in an orderly manner, वाचा spoken, शशंस  Hanuman.  
