5::20::1::Ravana expressed his intention in sweet words to the depressed and griefstricken ascetic Sita surrounded by demon guards:
5::20::2::On seeing me, Sita, you want to conceal your thighs, belly and breasts through fear of me. I think you do not want me to see you.
5::20::3::O largeeyed one  you are endowed with beauty in all limbs. You are the delight of all worlds. I desire you, dear  Oblige me.
5::20::4::O Sita no human or demon. who can take any form at their will can relieve your fear born of me.
5::20::5::O timid lady having an unrighteous approach to wives of others or their abduction by force is natural to demons, There is no doubt.
5::20::6::Mythili  let passion hold its sway over my body as it will. But I shall not force you or touch you since you do not love me.
5::20::7::O reverend lady, fear not me on that account. Have confidence in me. Show your love. Do not be swayed by grief .
5::20::8::O Lady, to wear a single braid, sleep on the ground, brooding, wearing soiled clothes and fasting without proper occasion does not suit you.
5::20::9::O Mythili having secured me, you get all these comforts wonderful garlands, sandal, incense, garments and beautiful ornaments, rich drinks, beds and seats.You can enjoy songs, dances accompanied by musical instruments.
5::20::10::You are a, a jewel among women. You should not  remain like this. You  should adorn yourself properly. How can you remain deprived after having me? 
5::20::11::Your charming youth should not pass away (uselessly). A past event does not come back like a current of stream.
5::20::12::O lady  with auspicious looks Me thinks, the creator must have retired after creating your beautiful form. For there is no one comparable to you in beauty.
5::20::13::O Vaidehi you have (extraordinary) beauty  and (exuberant) youth. Who would not lose his balance of mind even if he were Brahma the grandsire himself after getting you?
5::20::14::O one with a face like the cool fullmoon, with heavy hips. I am unable to extricate my eyes from any limb (of your body) I see.
5::20::15::O Mythili  be my wife. Give up this (folly due to) delusion. Be my chief consort among the several excellent women I have picked up here and there. Be blessed.
5::20::16::O timid lady, gems brought forcibly from all the worlds, this kingdom as well as myself are yours.
5::20::17::O lovely lady I will win all the cities and lands and give them to Janaka for your sake.
5::20::18::I'm unrivalled in this entire world. Behold my matchless virility which permits no rival in war.
5::20::19::The gods and demons were unable to withstand my power in wars fought against me. They were often shattered and defeated with their flags crushed in war.
5::20::20::Offer your love to me. Get yourself decorated in an excellent way. Wear glowing ornaments on your limbs. Let me see you in pleasingly decorated form.
5::20::21::O charming lady decorate yourself liberally. Enjoy these pleasures as you please. Drink and make merry.
5::20::22::Give away land and wealth as you wish. Enjoy with me freely and command me boldly. I will obey you by all means.
5::20::23::O blessed lady, see my affluence and my fame. Seeing you enjoy (life) by my grace all your kinsmen will follow.
5::20::24::O beautiful lady Rama has renounced victory, he has lost his fortune. Clad in bark, he is wandering in the forest following asceticism and sleeping on the ground. What can he do  for you? I am in doubt if he is alive or not.
5::20::25::O Vaidehi I wonder if Rama can see you at all. You are like moonlight veiled by dark clouds and  cannot  be seen even by the flying cranes.
5::20::26::Surely Raghava will not be able to win you back from my hands any more than the demon Hiranyakasipu was able to usurp the fame of Indra.
5::20::27::O lovely, timid lady your smile, your teeth and your eyes are bewitching. Just as Garuda snatches away a serpent, you ravish my mind by your beauty.
5::20::28::Even when you are attired in soiled silk and are bereft of ornaments, I find no interest in my own wives.
5::20::29::O Janaki There are a number of virtuous consorts residing in the harem of my royal palace. You may exercise your authority on all of them.
5::20::30::
5::20::31::O Sita of heavy hips and beautiful brows Be happy. Enjoy all the worlds of mine, the gems and wealth of Ravana. 
5::20::32::O queen Rama is not equal to me  either in penance or prowess or valour or wealth or brilliance or even in fame.
5::20::33::O delightful one I will bestow you with heaps of riches and land. Therefore, enjoy with me drinking, sporting, and revelling. Accept me and be happy to sport with me.Let your elatives join you and enjoy all my wealth.
5::20::34::O timid lady embellish yourself with necklaces of pure gold and enjoy with me in the enchanting seaside forest groves full of trees with blossoms and swarming bees.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे विंशस्सर्गः।Thus ends the twentieth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
