5::41::1::Having been honoured and praised by Sita's words, Hanuman prepared to depart from Sita's presence.
5::41::2::
5::41::3::'With demons, negotiation is of no use. They are wealthy, they need no gifts. Proud of their stregth, the demons will not yield to dissension. I think only by using power it can be done.
5::41::4::'Other than power, there is no way to accomplish the task of ascertaining their strength. If I slay a few strong ogres somehow they may soften a little and yield. 
5::41::5::'He, who can perform tasks in addition to the objective accomplished without affecting it, is really worthy.
5::41::6::'There are ways more than one even to perform a small work. And the capable know it.
5::41::7::'If I ascertain the difference in the strength of enemies and vanaras in war here itself and return to Kishkinda, the abode of vanaras, then I would have executed the orders of my lord properly.
5::41::8::'How can I have enduring war with the ogres today? How will my visit to this place end in happy return? Only in a combat this tenheaded Ravana will guage his strength and mine
5::41::9::'I can return happily only after I gauge the tenheaded Ravana's army in war, his strength, his companions including the ministers and his mind.
5::41::10::'This Ashoka garden of Ravana filled with different kinds of trees and creepers is a feast to the eyes and mind. It is an excellent garden like the Nandana  garden of Indra.
5::41::11::'I will devastate this garden, just as fire destroys a dried up forest. This will enrage Ravana.
5::41::12::'Then the demon king will order the horses, chariots and elephants and army equipped with tridents and spears to march against me. A great war will take place.
5::41::13::'I will fight with the ogres sent by Ravana, endowed with fierce strength and irresistible valour. After destroying their army I will go to the abode of vanaras happily'.
5::41::14::Furious Maruti endowed with fierce valour started uprooting the trees with the speed sprung from his thighs like the Windgod.
5::41::15::Then Hanuman felled a variety of trees and vines inhabited by intoxicated birds in the beautiful garden meant for womenfolk.
5::41::16::That garden looked ugly with uprooted trees, breached ponds and powdered mountain peaks.
5::41::17::Vines and trees wilted, birds shrieking, the embankments of ponds destroyed, its tender coppery red shoots withered, the garden looked as though it is burnt by forest fire and the climbers looked like women shivering in fear with their robes disarrayed.
5::41::18::The great garden lay disfigured, with the arbours and the picture galleries ruined, huge serpents and wild animals scattered, with stone houses and sheds destroyed.
5::41::19::The pleasuregarden of Ravana appeared as though it was spreading the creepers of sorrow, since it was totally destroyed by the monkey who had set out to protect a woman. प्रमदावनस्य  of the pleasure garden, प्रमदाअवनस्य of the hero who came to protect a lady.
5::41::20::The great vanara having perpetrated mischief, rousing anger in the mind of the great lord of wealth, stood at the exit doorway ready to combat singlehanded with many warriors in that  mighty army blazing in glory.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyfirst sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
