5::18::1::पुष्पितपादपम् flowering trees, वनम् grove, तथा likewise, विप्रेक्ष्यमाणस्य of the observer, वैदेहीम् Vaidehi, विचिन्वतश्च while searching, निशा night, किञ्चिच्छेषा a small part, अभवत् was left. 
5::18::2::सः he, विरात्रे at the end of the night, षडङ्गवेदविदुषाम् of those who were knowledgeable of Vedas and its six auxillary branches of sciences, क्रतुप्रवरयाजिनाम् those who were experts in performing exalted sacrificial ceremonies, ब्रह्मरक्षसाम् of brahmins among demons, ब्रह्मघोषान् sounds of Vedas, शुश्राव heard. 
5::18::3::अथ at that time, महाबाहुः strongarmed, महाबलः powerful, दशग्रीवः tennecked one, श्रुतिमनोहरैः with sounds delighting ears, मङ्गलवादित्रशब्दै: with auspicious sounds of musical instruments, प्राबुध्यत was awakened.  
5::18::4::प्रतापवान् chivalrous person, राक्षसेन्द्रः lord of demons, यथाकालम् at the usual time, विबुध्य after waking , स्रस्तमाल्याम्बरधरः with disarrayed garland and raiment, वैदेहीम्  of Vaidehi, अन्वचिन्तयत् thought.
5::18::5::तस्यां at her, मदनेन on account of his passion, भृशम् exceedingly, नियुक्तः gripped, मदोत्कटः overwhelmed with intoxication, सः he, राक्षसः demon, तं कामम् his passion, आत्मनि in himself, गूहितुम् to hide, न शशाक was not able.  
5::18::6::सर्वाभरणैः with all ornaments, युक्तः adorned with, अनुत्तमाम् excellent, श्रियम् splendour, बिभ्रत् hearing, सः he, सर्वपुष्पफलोपगैः filled with all kinds of flowers and fruits, बहुभिः with many, नगैः with trees, जुष्टाम् flourishing, ताम् such.
5::18::7::पुष्करिणीभिः with ponds, वृताम् covered, नानापुष्पोपशोभिताम् beautiful with different kinds of flowers, सदा मदैः always elated, विहगैः with birds, विचित्राम् colourful, परमाद्भुताम् very wonderful.
5::18::8::मणिकाञ्चनतोरणाः gateways ornamented with gold and gems, वीथीः pathways, सम्प्रेक्षमाणश्च observing, दृष्टिमनोहरैः with those pleasant to see, विविधैः with several, ईहामृगैश्च with wolves, जुष्टाम् occupies (with pleasure), नानामृगगणाकीर्णाम् filled with several kinds of animals herds, प्रपतितैः dropped from the trees, फलैः with fruits, वृताम् surrounded, सन्ततद्रुमाम् filled with a long stretch trees, अशोकवनिकामेव into the Ashoka garden, प्राविशत् entered. 
5::18::9::व्रजन्तम् while sauntering, तम् him, पौलस्त्यम् Poulastya, अङ्गनाशतमात्रम् only a hundred maidens, महेन्द्रम् Mahendra, देवगन्धर्वयोषितः females of gods and gandharvas, अनुव्रजत् were following. 
5::18::10::तत्र there, काश्चित् a few, योषितः women, काञ्चनीः golden, दीपिकाः lamps, जगृहु held, अपराः others, तालवृन्तानि plamleaf fans, जगृहुः were holding, वालव्यजन हस्ताश्च some women held fans of the hair of yaktail. 
5::18::11::काञ्चनैः golden, भृङ्गारैः pitchers, अग्रतः ahead of him, सलिलम् water, जह्रुः they carried, अन्याः others, मण्डलाग्रा: circular, बृसी: च अपि couches (rolls of twisted grass used as seats), गृह्य by holding, पृष्ठतः behind, ययुः moved. 
5::18::12::काचित् one, भामिनी a glowing lady, दक्षिणा a compassionate lady, रत्नमयीम् bejewelled, पूर्णाम् filled completely, पानस्य wine, स्थालीम् jar, दक्षिणेनैव पाणिना with her right hand only, जग्राह carried.
5::18::13::अपरा another lady, राजहंसप्रतीकाशम् resembling a royal swan, पूर्णशशिप्रभम् bright like fullmoon, सौवर्णदण्डम् having a golden handle, छत्रम् umbrella, गृहीत्वा taking, पृष्ठतः behind, ययौ went. 
5::18::14::निद्रामदपरीताक्ष्यः with eyes dizzy with sleep and intoxication, रावणस्य Ravana's, उत्तमाः prime, स्त्रियः wives, विद्युल्लताः like streaks of lightning, घनमिव like the the cloud, वीरम् heroic, पतिम् husband, अनुजग्मुः followed. 
5::18::15::व्याविद्धहारकेयूराः with necklaces and armlets disarrayed, समामृदितवर्णकाः with smudged sandal paste and other unguents on the body, समागलितकेशान्ताः with loosened hair, तथा likewise, सस्वेदवदनाः with sweat on the faces, मदशेषेण dizzy with leftover intoxication, निद्रया च and also due to sleep, घूर्णन्त्यः moving to and fro, स्वेदक्लिष्टाङ्गकुसुमाः due to wilting of flowers by the sweat on their limbs,  सुमाल्याकुलमूर्धजाः adorned with beautiful flowers in their hair, मदिरलोचनाः drunkeneyed, प्रियाः dear, भार्याः wives, नार्यः ladies, बहुमानाच्च due to high regard, कामाच्च and due to passion, प्रयान्तम् as he advanced, तम् him, नैऋतपतिम् the lord of demons, अन्वयुः followed. 
5::18::16::तासाम् their, पतिः husband, महाबलः powerful, कामपराधीनः under the control of passion, स च and he, मन्दः dull, सीतासक्तमनाः absorbed in the thoughts of Sita, मन्दाञ्चितगतिः walked slowly with measured steps, बभौ became.
5::18::17::ततः then, मारुतात्मजः son of the Windgod, सः कपिः that vanara, परमस्त्रीणाम् of those chief wives, काञ्चीनिनादं च the sound of golden girdles with small bells, नूपुराणाम् of their anklets, निस्वनं च sound, शुश्राव heard. 
5::18::18::कपिः vanara, हनुमान् Hanuman, अप्रतिमकर्माणम् one who does incomparable deeds, अचिन्त्यबलपौरुषम् a hero of unimaginable strength and valour, द्वारदेशम् the entrance, अनुप्राप्तम् reached, तं च him, ददर्श saw. 
5::18::19::गन्धतैलावसिक्ताभिः wet with fragrant oil, अग्रतः in front, ध्रियमाणाभिः held, अनेकाभिः by many, दीपिकाभिः with lamps, समन्तात् everywhere, अवभासितम् was shining. 
5::18::20::कामदर्पमदैः by lust, pride and intoxication, युक्तम् endowed, जिह्मताम्रायतेक्षणम् possesed of long curved bloodshot eyes, अपविद्धशरासनम् who set aside his quiver, समक्षम् directly, कन्दर्पमिव like god of love. 
5::18::21::मथितामृतफेनाभम् looking like the foam of churned nectar, अरजः without any dust, विमुक्तम् slipped, अङ्गदे in his armlet, सक्तम् stuck, उत्तमम् best, वस्त्रम् cloth, सलीलम् sportively, अनुकर्षन्तम् dragging. 
5::18::22::समीपम् close by, संक्रान्तमिव drawn nearer, तम् him, पत्रविटपे on a branch covered with leaves, लीनः concealed, पत्रपुष्पघनावृतः thickly covered with leaves and flowers, निध्यातुम् to scan the identity, उपचक्रमे started. 
5::18::23::ततः then, कपिकुञ्जरः leader of the monkeys, अवेक्षमाणः while looking carefully, रावणस्य Ravana's, रूपयौवनसम्पन्नाः endowed with youth and beauty, वरस्त्रियः chief wives, ददर्श saw. 
5::18::24::महायशाः glorious one, राजा king, सुरूपाभिः with charming ones, ताभिः with those women, परिवृतः  surrounded, मृगद्विजसङ्घुष्टम् echoed with sounds of beasts and birds, तत् that, प्रमदावनम् grove for women, प्रविष्टः entered. 
5::18::25::क्षीबः excited by drinking, विचित्राभरणः wore wonderful ornaments, शङ्कुकर्णः with long tapering ears, विश्रवसः of Visravas, पुत्रः son, ताराभिः with stars, चन्द्रमाः इव like the Moon, परमनारीभिः with damsels, वृतः surrounded, सः he, राक्षसाधिपः king of demons, तेन by him, दृष्टः seen, महातेजाः brilliant, महाकपिः great vanara, तेजोवन्तम् splendid, तम् him, ददर्शे saw. 
5::18::26::मारुतात्मजः son of the Windgod, वानरः vanara, महातेजाः brilliant one, हनुमान् Hanuman, अयम् this, महाबाहुः strongarmed, रावणः Ravana, इति this, सञ्चिन्त्य having thought, अवप्लुतः got down. 
5::18::27::तथा such, उग्रतेजाः possessed of extraordinary energy, सः he, हनुमान् Hanuman, तस्य his, तेजसा by the might, निर्धूतः taken aback, पत्रगुह्यान्तरे deep in the leaves, सक्तः concealed, संवृतः covered, अभवत् remained there. 
5::18::28::सः he, रावणः Ravana, असितकेशान्ताम् darkhaired lady, सुश्रोणीम् a lady of beautiful hips, संहतस्त्नीम् a lady of plump breasts, असितापाङ्गाम् with dark side glances, ताम् her, दिदृक्षुः desiring to see, उपावर्तत returned  
