5::34::1::Hearing the words of Sita who was overwhelmed with grief, the monkey leader Hanuman felt sad and thus spoke comforting her: 
5::34::2::By the command of Rama I am here as a messenger. He is keeping well. He is well and wishes you well.
5::34::3::O godlike lady Rama, son of Dasaratha, master of the Vedas, wielder of Brahmastra wishes you well.
5::34::4::The mighty Lakshmana too, a dear brother and follower of your husband is immersed in grief, and sends salutations to you.
5::34::5::On hearing the wellbeing of Rama and Lakshman, lions among men, Sita experienced thrill all over her body. She then  spoke to Hanuman:
5::34::6::The adage that 'joy comes to a living being even though it be at the end of  a hundred years' is popular. It appears true in my case. 
5::34::7::Hanuman thus created a sense of wonderful joy in her as they came together. Both of them started to converse restoring confidence in each other.
5::34::8::Hearing the reply of Sita, who was crying piteously, stricken with grief, the monkey leader, Hanuman moved close to her.
5::34::9::As Hanuman started slowly drawing close, Sita suspected he might be Ravana.
5::34::10::Ohshame on me. I have told him my story which should not have been said. This is verily Ravana come in a disguise.
5::34::11::So saying Sita of flawless limbs, emaciated with grief, left the branch of Ashoka tree held by her and squatted on the ground.
5::34::12::The longarmed Hanuman saw Sita, who was stricken with grief and deluded with fear. He prostrated to her. But out of fear she did not look at him.  
5::34::13::On seeing the vanara prostrated, the moonfaced lady, sighed deeply and spoke to him in a sweet voice:
5::34::14::If you are that trickster Ravana who appears incognito before me, it is not good for you. You are causing grief again.
5::34::15::You are the same Ravana who took the guise of a mendicant, giving up your real form and came to Janasthana.
5::34::16::Oh you are one who can assume any form at will. You are a nightstalker. It is not good for you to cause pain to me who is already emaciated through fasting, who is pitiable and who is already afflicted. 
5::34::17::May be my suspicion is not correct Because I am experiencing pleasure in my mind in your presence.
5::34::18::O great vanara, If on the other hand you have come here as Rama's messenger I wish you well. I love Rama's story. Tell me.
5::34::19::O vanara Rama's virtues are dear to me to hear. O gentle one just as the current of the river wears away its banks, my mind is lured by your presence.
5::34::20::Oh I have been seeing the person sent by Rama in my dream for a long time. This is a pleasant dream to me.
5::34::21::Even if I can see the heroic Rama together with Lakshmana in my dream my pain will be gone. Even the dream is inimical to me (I cannot sleep and thus cannot dream.)
5::34::22::I do not think it is a dream. Pleasure cannot be experienced by seeing a vanara in a dream. I experience pleasure now (seeing a monkey in a dream is a bad omen).
5::34::23:: Can this be a delusion of my mind or a mental imbalance (resulting in movement of the mind in the body). Is it a malady born of  my madness? Or is it a mirage?
5::34::24::No, this cannot be insanity. nor even delusion. But I recognise this vanara well
5::34::25::Considering the strength and weakness of demons in that manner Sita thought that Hanuman was none other than the king of demons who can asume any form at will.
5::34::26::Having entertained such thoughts, Sita, the lady with a fairwaist, daughter of Janaka,  did not respond to the vanara.  
5::34::27::Hanuman, son of the Windgod understood what was going on in Sita's mind and spoke pleasing words that brought joy in her.
5::34::28::Rama is glorious as the Sun, brings delight to the whole world like the Moon, is the king of kings like Vaisravana,  and renowned like Visnu endowed with valour.
5::34::29::He is truthful in speech like Brihaspati, prosperous (like Kubera), sweettongued, handsome, graceful like Kamadeva.
5::34::30::He shows anger to one who deserves it, he is the foremost charioteer of the world and he is a great self under the shadow of whose shoulders the whole world takes refuge. 
5::34::31::You will see the consequences of the action of Ravana who abducted you deceitfully in the form of deer when Rama was away from the hermitage.
5::34::32::Heroic Rama will soon release many scorching, fiery arrows in anger and kill Ravana. I seek your permission as an envoy of Rama. Filled with grief by your separation, he has made inquiries about your welfare.
5::34::33::The brilliant, longarmed Lakshmana, delight of Sumitra enquires about your welfare and offers salutations to you.
5::34::34:: O goddess like lady Rama's friend Sugriva, king of vanara chieftans inquires about your wellbeing.
5::34::35::O Vaidehi Rama, Lakshmana and Sugriva always remember you. Luckily you are alive even though you are under the clutches of shedemons.
5::34::36::Very soon you will see mighty Rama, Lakshmana and Sugriva of unlimited prowess surrounded by crores of vanaras.
5::34::37::I am Sugriva's minister known as Hanuman, a vanara who entered the city of Lanka after leaping over the great ocean.
5::34::38::Setting my foot with my valour on the head of the cruelminded Ravana, using my valour,  I came here to see you.
5::34::39::O goddesslike lady I am not  a deceitful person as you suppose me to be. Shake off your suspicion as I speak to you and trust me.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे चतुस्त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyfourth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
