5::35::1::On hearing about Rama from the bull among vanaras, thus spoke Vaidehi politely in a sweet voice:
5::35::2::Where did you come in contact with Rama? How did you assess Lakshmana? How did an alliance of vanaras and humans take place?
5::35::3::O vanara tell me all about the identification marks of Rama and Lakshmana again so that grief does not enter my mind.
5::35::4::What does Rama look like? And Laksmana? How are his thighs, arms? Tell me.
5::35::5::Questioned thus by Vaidehi, Hanuman, son of the Windgod started describing Rama's physique as it is.
5::35::6::O Vaidehi with eyes like lotus petals although you know your husband's and Lakshmana's form and distinguishing marks, it is my good fortune that you asked me (to describe them).
5::35::7::O largeeyed lady I will describe those distinguishing marks of Rama and Lakshmana Listen.
5::35::8::O daughter of Janaka Rama with eyes like lotus petals is a person born with a delightful form, richly endowed with indescribable charm and politeness.
5::35::9::He vies with the Sun in effulgence, with earth in forbearance, with Brihaspati in intelligence, and in fame with Indra.
5::35::10::Rama is a protector of the entire world of living beings not to speak of his own people. He is a protector of his own race. He guards righteousness. He is a scorcher of enemies.
5::35::11::O beautiful lady Rama is a protector of the four classes of society (Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaisya and Sudra) in the world. He follows codes of conduct and makes others follow them. 
5::35::12::He is luminous and highly revered. He observes vow of selfcontrol. He is steadfast and recognises services rendered by sages. He is aware of the rites and the ways of administration.
5::35::13::He is welltrained in statecraft. He is devoted to brahmins. Endowed with an excellent conduct, he is learned in scriptures and a scorcher of enemies.
5::35::14::He is versed in Yajurveda and is respected by Vedic scholars. He has mastered Dhanurveda and other Vedas and auxillary Vedas as well.
5::35::15::O godlike lady Rama has broad shoulders, strong arms, conchshaped neck and an auspicious countenance. With his fleshy round arms and copperyred eyes, he is renowned in all the worlds.
5::35::16::His tone is resonant like drums, he has a beautiful, dark, shining complexion. He has symmetrical, well proportioned limbs. He is neither too tall nor too short.
5::35::17::He has three stiff parts, three long parts, three even parts, three shining parts, elevated in three parts, has three raised parts, his body has lines in three parts and is  of coppery reddish colour in three parts. He has a majestic look.
5::35::18::He has three folds in the skin of his neck and belly, is depressed in the middle of his soles and the nipples, undersized at four placesthe neck, penis, shanks and back, has three spirals on his head, has four lines under his thumb, has four lines on his forehead, he is a person with four cubits in height and symmetrical arms, cheeks and thighs. 
5::35::19::He is a person with his pairs of eyebrows, nostrils, eyes, ears, lips, nipples, elbows, wrists, knees, testicles, loins, arms, legs and buttocks in good symmetry he has four sharp teeth. He walks in different gaits like a lion, leopard, elephant and bull as occasion demands he has sharp nose, charming lips and jaws. He has smooth hair, eyes, skin, teeth and feet and his eight parts of his body namely back, trunk, limbs, fingers, toes, eyes and testicles are long.
5::35::20::Ten limbs of the body resemble lotuses. He has proportionate limbs. He is known by the virtue of his spledour, fame and glory. Both his teeth and eyes are fair. Six parts of his body are elevated, nine parts of his body are fine and sharp. He pursues spiritual merit, worldly comfort and sensual delight in three periods of the dayforenoon, midday and evening. He always adopts the righteous way of life.
5::35::21::He is ever established in truth and righteousness. He is prosperous and desires to accumulate wealth in order to shower favour on others. He knows the right use of time and place in discharging his duties. He has endeared himself to all by his words.
5::35::22::His invincible brother Saumitri born of a different mother is a replica of Rama in affection, charm and virtues.
5::35::23::While earnestly searching for you all over the earth both tigers among men came in contact with us. 
5::35::24::While both of them were wandering, searching for you all over the earth they saw Sugriva, the lord of animals who had been thrown out of kingship by his elder brother and was living on the mountain Rshyamuka frightened of him. 
5::35::25::Sugriva, king of vanaras who is committed to defend truth has been deposed from the kingdom by his elder brother. We keep attending on him.
5::35::26::Both the princes clad in bark robes and armed with powerful bows reached the beautiful location of Rshyamukha mountain.
5::35::27::On seeing the tigers among men armed with bows, Sugriva, the bull among vanaras jumped from the mountain deluded with fear and reached the peak.
5::35::28:: Thereafter the lord of vanaras staying on the mountain top quickly sent me to meet both of them.
5::35::29::
5::35::30::I recognised the true status of  both the mighty men who were filled with joy, placed them on my back, and reached the mountaintop.
5::35::31::I reported faithfully about both the highsouled men to Sugriva. As they got to know each other through conversation a fast friendship developed between them.
5::35::32::
5::35::33::Then Rama, consoled Sugriva who was dethroned and abandoned on acount of a woman by his brother Vali, endowed with great prowess.
5::35::34::Then Lakshmana spoke to the lord of vanaras, Sugriva about your loss and the grief caused to Rama, who is adept in accomplishing difficult deeds with ease. 
5::35::35::Having heard the words of Lakshmana, the king of vanaras became extremely lustreless like the Sun overshadowed by the planet Rahu.
5::35::36::
5::35::37::I collected the ornaments and gave them to Rama. He lost his senses on seeing the jingling ornaments scattered.
5::35::38::The divine self who is effulgent like god wailed in many ways placing the beautiful ornaments on his lap.
5::35::39::Rama looked at them and wept clasping them again and again in grief which inflamed like fire.
5::35::40::Rama, the great self, immersed in sorrow lay down on the ground. I also consoled him with great difficulty and helped him to get up.
5::35::41::Longarmed Rama along with Lakshmana looked at them again and again and gave them to the care of Sugriva.
5::35::42::O divine lady on account of your separation he is ever blazing like a mountain of fire (Samvartaka).
5::35::43::Rama is burning like a furnace by (three fires) sleeplessness, grief and intense anxiety just as the three sacred fires keep a firesanctuary intensely heated.
5::35::44::On account of sorrow caused by not being able to see you, Rama of Raghu dynasty is shaken up like a lofty mountain is shaken by earthquake.
5::35::45::Oh princess unable to see you, Rama has found no joy in roaming delightful forests, rivers and streams.
5::35::46::Oh daughter of Janaka after killing Ravana, along with his friends and relatives Rama, the tiger among men, will meet you.
5::35::47::(Having become friends) Rama and Sugriva together reached an agreement to kill Vali and search for you. 
5::35::48::Thereafter both the princes together arrived at Kishkinda and killed Vali, king of vanaras in a combat.
5::35::49::Then Rama quickly killed Vali in a combat and made Sugriva the lord of all troops of vanaras and bears.
5::35::50::Oh Illustrious lady In that manner alliance was established between Rama and Sugriva. Know me to be Hanuman, arrived here as their messenger.
5::35::51::Having obtained his kingdom Sugriva despatched the vanara leaders to all ten directions (to search for you).
5::35::52::Following Sugriva's orders, the powerful monkey leaders huge as the Himalayas, king of mountains went all over the earth (searching).
5::35::53::Following Sugriva's orders, we, the monkeys, since then are moving about searching the entire earth eager to find you or to carry out Sugriva's orders.
5::35::54::
5::35::55::We wasted many nights and days immersed in disappointment (for not being able to find you) and we missed our path in the great Vindhya mountain.
5::35::56::We decided to give up our lives due to disappointment, transgression of the time limit  fixed for us and fear of the monkey lord (fear of facing the king without finding you).
5::35::57::We decided to give up our lives since we were unable to see the feet of the queen (Sita) even after searching the forest fortresses and the (banks of) mountain streams.
5::35::58::
5::35::59::When we were disappointed (in tracing you) and were at the point of death having been commanded by the king (that whosoever overstays would be killed) a gigantic powerful bird appeared to fulfil our task.
5::35::60::That king of vultures, Sampati was the brother of king of birds Jatayu. Hearing about the death of his younger brother Sampati felt distresed and spoke in anger:
5::35::61::'O best of vanaras by whom was my younger brother killed? Where was he dropped down? I wish you to tell me all about that.
5::35::62::
5::35::63::Having heard about the death of Jatayu, O charming lady that Sampati Aruna's son felt sad and told us that you are at Ravana's palace.  
5::35::64::Having heard Sampati's encouraging words all of us led by Angada departed immediately.
5::35::65::The happy monkeys were satisfied. Enthusiastic about seeing you, they rose from the Vindhya mountain and reached the limit of the sea  shore in the north.
5::35::66::
5::35::67::When the vanara army was feeling despondent at the sight of the ocean, I leaped across the sea, a hundred yojanas, pushing aside  all my fear. 
5::35::68::I entered at night the city of Lanka teeming with demons and saw Ravana and saw you immersed in sorrow.
5::35::69::O sinless lady I have given you a faithful account. I am a messenger of Dasaratha's son. And you may speak now, O divine lady
5::35::70::O divine lady Know that I have come here for your cause carrying out the mission of Rama. I am Sugriva'a minister and son of the Windgod.
5::35::71::Your lord Rama of Kakutstha race, supreme among wielders of weapons is doing well. So is venerable Lakshmana endowed with auspicious signs engaged in serving him.
5::35::72::O queen seeking the welfare of your Valiant husband I came here at the behest of Sugriva all alone.
5::35::73::I can assume any form at my will. I searched for you without any help moving in the southern direction and reached this place .
5::35::74::Fortunately for me I can finally dispel the fear of the vanara chiefs who are regretting your loss, by letting them know that you have been found.
5::35::75::Oh queen luckily for me, crossing the ocean has not gone in vain. I am fortunate because I will attain fame of finding you.
5::35::76::Mighty Raghava will take you after killing Ravana, the king of demons along with his kith and kin.
5::35::77::Oh Vaidehi there is a famous mountain called Malyavan. From there a monkey called Kesari went to mount Gokarna.
5::35::78::He (Kesari) is said to be my father by the divine sages. He retrieved a piece of land in a holy spot of that sea shore and killed Sambasadana, a demon who was oppressing righteous people. 
5::35::79::O Mythili I was born in that land retrieved by the Windgod. I am known as Hanuman by virtue of my own action.
5::35::80::In order to inspire confidence in you about me I have narrated the virtues of your husband. O sinless queen Rama will take you from here very soon.
5::35::81::The griefstricken Sita trusted him by his logical presentation of reasons as well as identifications. She believed that he was a messenger (of Rama).
5::35::82::Janaki experienced immeasurable happiness and shed tears of joy through her curved eyes.
5::35::83::Her face with large eyes with a tinge of red corners shone like the Moon released from Rahu.
5::35::84::She realised that the monkey was none other than Hanuman. Then he looked at her who was pleasing to see and spoke again:
5::35::85::Mythili, everything I intended to say has been narrated to you. Calm yourself down. What shall I do? Or else, tell me what pleases you. I shall go back.
5::35::86::(My father) a mighty monkey killed Sambasadana in a battle on the command of a great seer. I am a vanara (born to a monkey) by the impact of the Windgod. I am equal to the Windgod in power.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चत्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtyfifth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
