5::45::1::Commanded by Ravana, the seven sons of minister blazing like fire followed by large army of experts in archery, possessing great valour, armed with weapons, being distinguished wielders of weapons, skilled in the use of weapons, who were equally capable of conquering each other sallied forth gladly to fight with Hanuman. They drove chariots yoked with horses which were decked with golden mesh, holding totem staffs (a figure engraved to identify a hero) and flags, neighing like clouds. The valiant  heroes were sporting and making sounds like stormy  clouds wielding wonderful bows glittering like molten gold, shining like lightning. As they marched from the palace they looked like  stormy clouds accompanied by lightning.       
5::45::2::Their mothers and relatives and their friends were struck with grief when they learnt about the kinkaras killed.
5::45::3::The barnished golden ornaments worn by them were shining as they brushed shoulders with one another (eager to fight first) to attack Hanuman who stood waiting at the main archway.
5::45::4::They went roaring with their chariots rattling, sending forth torrents of arrows like the stormy clouds thundering.
5::45::5::Later, Hanuman covered with showers of arrows scattered all over appeared like the king of mountains shot with showers of rain. 
5::45::6::Then the monkey moving fast in the clear sky rendered the arrows of the giant heroes and speeding chariots futile.
5::45::7::Sporting in the sky with the giants who held bows in their hands, Hanuman shone like the powerful Windgod sporting in the sky surrrounded by rambling dark clouds. 
5::45::8::Valiant Hanuman making terrific sound and frightening the army of ogres marched swiftly.
5::45::9::The scorcher of enemies, Hanuman hit some ogres with his palm, some with his feet and some with his fist and pierced some with his nails.
5::45::10::The monkey strangled some with his chest and some between his thighs. A few fell down dead on the ground hearing his roaring noise.  
5::45::11::Struck by fear on seeing Hanuman, the seven sons of ministers dropped down dead on the ground, and their army fled in all the ten directions.
5::45::12::The elephants trumpeted discordantly out of fear, the horses fell down on the ground and even the chariots with seats, parasols and flag staffs broken were strewn all over the ground.
5::45::13::Streams of blood flowed and Lanka was filled with many kinds of horrifying sounds of cries.
5::45::14::Having killed the ogres who were old and strong, the valiant and mighty Hanuman, wishing to slay the other ogres advanced towards the archway.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे पञ्चचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyfifth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
