5::59::1::Hanuman, son of the Windgod having narrated in detail all that had happened again started disclosing further details৷৷
5::59::2::It is due to Rama's exertions, Sugriva's endeavour and Sita's conduct that I have been successful. My devotion to Sita has further deepened. 
5::59::3::Ravana is a great soul because, even though he has done harm to her, he is not killed. This is so because Sita being a chaste woman of good conduct and deep devotion towards her husband (she refrained from killing Ravana as she wanted her husband to do that.)
5::59::4::Sita can burn Ravana with the mere touch of her body but because of the power of his penance, he was not burnt even though he touched her hand. If enraged, Janaki can burn the whole world (by virtue of her chastity) in a way that even the flame of fire can not do. (But she desired that her husband should kill him.)
5::59::5::
5::59::6::
5::59::7::When strong, wise and accomplished persons are there with me desiring victory  why speak again?
5::59::8::I can also kill all the army,  his followers, sons and brothers of Ravana in war.
5::59::9::Even if the missiles used by Indrajit are Brahmastra, Indrastra, Rudrastra, Vayavastra, Varunastra which are difficult to see. I will destroy them in war and kill them.
5::59::10::Now if I am permitted, I shall repulse them and destroy them with my valour. A  ceaseless shower of rocks sent forth by me in war is enough to destroy even gods what to say about the nightrangers? 
5::59::11::The ocean may exceed its limits, the mountain Mandara may be shaken from its position but  no hostile army can move Jambavan in war.
5::59::12::
5::59::13::Even the mountain Mandara would be shattered by great Panasa or Nila by the speed of their thighs. What to say in a battle against ogres? 
5::59::14::Who among gods, yakshas, gandharvas, nagas and birds can contend Mainda or Dvivida in battle?Tell me.
5::59::15::The (two) sons of Aswini are outstanding and foremost fighters and proud of waging war. Who can oppose them? I do not see any one.
5::59::16::By virtue of the boons received from Brahma, they are very proud. They have also consumed nectar of immortality and are foremost among vanaras.
5::59::17::Earlier Brahma, the grandsire of all worlds has given the Aswini sons immeasurable invulnerability to honour them.
5::59::18::The heroic monkeys, proud of their boons became intoxicated it and slaughtered vast army and drank the nectar of immortality.
5::59::19::If these two become angry they have the power to destroy Lanka, the cavalry, chariots and also the elephants even if the vanaras stay away.
5::59::20::I have burnt Lanka and have made my name popular even on the highways.
5::59::21::Mighty Rama and Lakshmana and King Sugriva protected by Rama are renowned for their valour. I am Hanuman, son of the Windgod, a servant of Rama. This I announced. 
5::59::22::In the wicked, Ravana's Ashoka garden under the Simsupa tree the noble lady Sita surrounded by ogresses, is sitting, tormented by tears. Her brightness is like the Moon's, veiled by flakes of clouds. She does not care for Ravana's glory. She is brooding over Rama only.
5::59::23::Chaste Sita of beautiful hips, an auspicious lady though bound is wholly devoted to Rama alone like Sachi, the wife of Indra who was bound by Nahusha.
5::59::24::Wearing the same single cloth which she had worn before, filled with dust, Sita remained sorrowful and piteous wishing her husband's welfare.
5::59::25::I saw Sita often threatened by uglylooking ogresses. Wearing a single braid, she looked pathetic, thinking always about her husband, lying on the bare ground. She was like a lustreless lotus in winter. Spurning the advances by Ravana, she is rather determined to commit suicide.
5::59::26::I created a little confidence in the fawneyed lady by pacifying her and explaining her with great difficulty the alliance of Rama and Sugriva on hearing which she became happy.
5::59::27::To Rama, killing Ravana is easy (since Ravana's power of penance has already declined by his abduction of Sita). Separated from her husband she is naturally emaciated. She has become slender just like a student on the new Moon day (on the first day of study). 
5::59::28::Noble Sita is absorbed in grief. Let us do all that has to be done now.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकोनषष्टितमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fiftyninth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
