5::46::1::Coming to know that the seven sons of the ministers were slain by the great vanara,  Ravana, who had concealed his feelings of agony thought of a good plan.
5::46::2::The tenheaded Ravana, eager to capture Hanuman, commanded his five army Generals called Virupaksha, Yupaksha, Durdhara, Praghasa and Bhaskarna, who were great warriorstatesmen valiant and, equal to wind in speed.
5::46::3::O Army generals march with a large, strong army with horses, chariots and elephants and punish the vanara.
5::46::4::Go to that forestdweller and make all efforts to impose on him punishment appropriate to time and place (keeping in view the harm he has done).
5::46::5::Judging again and again from all actions, I do not think he is an ordinary monkey. He is a being endowed with great strength. 
5::46::6::To me it appears he is created by Indra with his ascetic power (for punishing us). I have subdued nagas, yakshas, gandharvas and even gods, asuras and ascetics with your help. So you should certainly bring him here without doing any harm. Capture the monkey forcibly. Do not insult that mighty monkey.
5::46::7::Earlier I have seen monkeys of immense prowess, like Vali and Sugriva as well as Jambavan, the bear. Also I have seen the army general, Nila, Dvivida and others. They do not have such tremendous splendour or movement valour, intellect and strength and energy. They did not have such ability to change form at their will.
5::46::8::It should be understood that he has taken the form of a monkey. You have to put in extraordinary effort to capture him by acting in a suitable manner.
5::46::9::Even Indra, suras, asuras and humans and the three worlds together are incompetent to stand before you in a battlefield.
5::46::10::Even then, you should safeguard yourself with great effort adopting warstrategies in an intelligent  manner to be victorious, for success in war is uncertain.
5::46::11::Taking King's order, the strong and swift warriors, resplendent as the flame of sacrificial fire sallied forth with their army on chariots, on the back of rutting elephants,  some on swift horses equipped with sharp weapons of many kinds.
5::46::12::The heroic giants caught sight of the vanara, who was blazing  encircled as though he was by the rays of his own glory, looking like the rising Sun. He was endowed with extraordinary agility, intelligence, and tremendous strength standing, waiting at the archway.
5::46::13::Having observed the tremendous strength, intelligence and swiftness in action of Hanuman, the generals of the army positioned at all directions and assailed him with dreadful weapons.
5::46::14::Durdhara pierced into the head of Hanuman with five sharp arrows and polished steel shafts with yellow tips (gold) shining like red lotus petals. They were like petals of lilies thrown on the head of Hanuman (causing no pain).
5::46::15::With five arrows pierced in the head of the vanara, Hanuman leaped into the sky with terrible roar, which resounded in all the ten directions.
5::46::16::Then the powerful, hero, Durdhara, mounted on his chariot, fastened his bowstring and hit Hanuman with hundreds of sharp arrows. 
5::46::17::The great monkey kept away the showering arrows like the wind prevents raincloud from showering rain drops at the end of monsoon.
5::46::18::When the son of the Windgod was attacked by Durdhara, he again grew in size  
5::46::19::Hanuman suddenly leaped far off into the air at high speed and fell on Durdhara's chariot just like a thunderous lightning falls on a mountain. 
5::46::20::Having lost his chariot, the horses yoked to it killed, its axle and pole broken to pieces, Durdhara fell down dead from the chariot.
5::46::21::Seeing the body of Durdhara fallen on the ground, enraged Virupaksha and Yupaksha, the unassailable crushers of enemies leaped towards him.
5::46::22::As the strongarmed vanara stood stationed in the clear white sky both the generals leaped into the sky and hit him all of a sudden with two iron hammers.
5::46::23::Powerful Hanuman, an equal to Garuda in valour fell down while resisting the swift generals.
5::46::24::Then the son of the Windgod seized a sala tree uprooted it, lifted it and smashed the two giant generals with it.
5::46::25::Finding all the three generals dead, swift Praghasa advanced towards the Vanara and attacked him. Valiant Bhasakarna also lifted a trident and attacked him. Both were famous for swift and violent action in war
5::46::26::Praghasa fought back the glorious tiger among vanaras with a sharp crowbar on one side and Bhaskarana attacked with a spear from the other.
5::46::27::Attacked by both the generals, the fur on the vanara's body was smeared with blood from his wounded limbs, shining like the rising Sun smeared with blood became furious.
5::46::28::Hanuman, a courageous and mighty elephant among the monkeys uprooted a mountain peak along with its animals, serpents and trees and killed both the demon generals.
5::46::29::When the five army chiefs were killed, Hanuman began to destoy the remaining army force.
5::46::30::The vanara pitted horses against horses, elephants against elephants, warriors against warriors and chariots against chariots as Indra destroyed demons.
5::46::31::There was no path (one could not move forward) with elephants, and horses killed and with broken axles of great chariots and smashed chariots spread all over the way.
5::46::32::Then the heroic monkey having killed the army generals and their army and destroyed their vehicles in war came back to the archway after reviewing and stood like the timespirit bent upon the destruction of humanity.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे षट्चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortysixth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
