5::7::1::बलवान् powerful, सः he, व्यासक्तवैडूर्यसुवर्णजालम् fitted with golden lattices encrusted with vaidurya, प्रावृषि in the rainy season, विद्युत्पिनद्धम् with streaks of lightning, सविहङ्गजालम् with flocks of birds, महत् great, मेघजालं यथा like the abode of clouds, वेश्मजालम्  conglomeration of houses, ददर्श saw.
5::7::2::निवेशनानाम् of the houses, विविधाः several, शालाः halls, प्रधानशङ्खायुधचापशालाः for storing valuable conches, weapons and bows, पुनः again, वेश्माद्रिषु on top of attics on the houses, मनोहराः delightful, विशालाः spacious, चन्द्रशालाः terraces, ददर्श saw.
5::7::3::कपिः monkey, नानावसुराजितानि various kinds treasures, देवासुरैश्चापि even by gods and demons, सुपूजितानि worshipped by, सर्वैः by all, दोषैः defects, परिवर्जितानि devoid, स्वबलार्जितानि earned by his might, गृहाणि houses, ददर्श saw.
5::7::4::तानि those, प्रयत्नाभिसमाहितानि collected with great care and effort, साक्षात् directly, मयेन by Maya, निर्मितानीव as though built, महीतले on earth, सर्वगुणोत्तराणि of excellent quality, लङ्काधिपतेः of the lord of Lanka, गृहाणि mansions, ददर्श saw.
5::7::5::ततः then, उछ्रचितमेघरूपम् appearing like a towering cloud, मनोहरम् soulcaptivating, काञ्चनचारुरूपम् golden palace possessing splendour of molten gold, अप्रतिरूपरूपम् matchless, आत्मबलानुरूपम् worthy of the might of Ravana, रक्षोधिपस्य of the lord of demons, गृहोत्तमम् magnificent palace, ददर्श saw.
5::7::6::महीतले on earth, प्रकीर्णम् scattered, स्वर्गमिव like heaven, श्रिया with splendour, ज्वलन्तम् while glittering, बहुरत्नकीर्णम् with many gems, नानातरूणाम् of all kinds of trees, कुसुमावकीर्णम् scattered with flowers, रजसा with dust, अवकीर्णम् covered, गिरेः mountain, अग्रमिव like the peak. 
5::7::7::नारीप्रवेकैः by resplendent women,दीप्यमानमिव as if lit up,तटिद्भिः with lightning, अम्भोदवत् like a raincloud, अर्च्यमानम् worshipped, हंसप्रवेकैः borne by swans, वाह्यमानम् इव as if being drawn by, श्रिया auspicious, युतम् endowed, खे in the sky, सुकृताम् royal, विमानम् aerial chariot.
5::7::8::युक्तीकृतमेघचित्रम् mass of colourful clouds, ग्रहचन्द्रचित्रम् looking colourful with planets and Moon, नभः यथा like the sky, बहुरत्नचित्रम् colourful on account of gems encrusted, बहुधातुचित्रम् colourful on account of many minerals, नगाग्रं यथा like the peak of a mountain, विमानरत्नम् jewel of a chariot, ददर्श saw.
5::7::9::मही earth, पर्वतराजिपूर्णा filled with mountain ranges, कृता drawn, शैलाः mountains, वृक्षवितानपूर्णाः filled with a canopy of trees, कृताः drawn, वृक्षाः trees, पुष्पवितानपूर्णाः filled with a canopy of flowers, कृताः drawn on it, पुष्पम् flowers, केसरपत्रपूर्णम् filled with petals and filaments, कृतम् drawn.
5::7::10::पाण्डुराणि white in colour, वेश्मानि च houses, कृतानि drawn, तथा so also, सुपुष्पाणि with beautiful flowers, पुष्कराणि च ponds also, पुनश्च again, स केसराणि having filaments, पद्मानि lotuses, तथा so also, धन्यानि complete, चित्राणि paintings, वनानि gardens.
5::7::11::तत्र there, महाकपिः great vanara, पुष्पाह्वयम् Pushpaka chariot by name, नामविराजमानम् splendid indeed, रत्नप्रभाभिः glitter of gems, विवर्धमानम् glowing, वेश्मोत्तमानामपि of magnificent mansions, उच्यमानम् tall, महाविमानम् great chariot. 
5::7::12::वैडूर्यमयाः made of vaidurya, विहङ्गाः birds, तथा similarly, रूप्यप्रवालैश्च made of silver and corals, विहङ्गाः birds, नानावसुभिः with various gems, चित्राः colourful, भुजङ्गाः serpents, जात्याः due to there good breeding, अनुरूपाः similar, शुभाङ्गाः with auspicious limbs, तुरगाः horses, कृताः drawn.
5::7::13::प्रवालजाम्बूनदपुष्पपक्षाः wings engraved with corals and gold, सुपक्षाः having beautiful wings, सलीलम् in a sportive way, आवर्जितजिह्मपक्षाः with their artificial wings bent down (tossed), विहङ्गाः birds, कृताः were drawn, साक्षात् truly, कामस्य cupid's, पक्षाः इव like wings, भान्ति seemed.
5::7::14::पद्मिनि in a lotuspond, सुहस्ता having beautiful hands, सकेसराश्च with filaments, उत्पलपत्रहस्ताः blue lotuses by their trunk carried, लक्ष्मीः goddess of wealth, नियुज्यमानास्तु stationed in place, गजाः elephants, तथा similarly, पद्महस्ता holding a lotus in hand, सुहस्ता of beautiful hand, देवी च goddess, कृता drawn, बभूव appeared.
5::7::15::इतीव in that way, शोभनम् auspicious, चारुशोभनम् beautifully fashioned, नगमिव like a mountain, तद्गृहम् that palace, अभिगम्य having reached, सविस्मयः wonderstruck, परमसुगन्धि highly fragrant, सुन्दरम् beautiful, हिमात्यये at the end of winter, चारुकन्दरम् having beautiful caves, नगमिव like mountain, तत् that, पुनश्च once again. 
5::7::16::ततः then, सः कपिः monkey, पूजिताम् worshipped, दशमुखबाहुपालिताम् ruled by the arms of the tenheaded king, तां पुरीम् that city, अभिपत्य having reached, चरन् while moving about, सुपूजिताम् venerable, पतिगुणवेगवर्जिताम् who was deprived of the benefit of her husband's virtuous conduct, तां जनकसुताम् that Janaka's daughter Sita, अदृश्य unable to find, सुदुःखितः was deeply sorrowful.
5::7::17::ततः from there, तदा then, बहुविधभावितात्मनः thinking of many things in his mind, कृतात्मनः of a great soul, सुवर्त्मनः of the followers of righteous path, सुचक्षुषः foresighted, प्रविचरतः while he moved, जनकसुताम् daughter of Janaka, अपश्यत: unable to find, महात्मनः of the great self, मनः mind, अतिदुःखितम् very distressed, अभवत् became. 
