5::53::1::दशग्रीवः tennecked one, महात्मनः greatsoul, भ्रातुः brother's, तस्य his, देशकालहितम् in keeping with the laws of the land, तत् वचनम् that word, श्रुत्वा after hearing, उत्तरम् in return, वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवीत् spoke. 
5::53::2::भवता by you, सम्यक् very well, उक्तं हि indeed spoken, दूतवध्या killing of emissary, विगर्हिता is censured, वधात् other than killing, अन्यः other, निग्रहः punishment, अस्य his, अवश्यम् surely, क्रियताम् may be done. 
5::53::3::कपीनाम् for the monkeys, लाङ्गूलम् tail, इष्टम् is dear, भूषणम् is an ornament, भवति किल indeed is, अस्य his, तत् that, शीघ्रम् at once, दीप्यताम् may be set fire to, दग्धेन with the burning, तेन by that, गच्छतु  let go.
5::53::4::ततः then, पश्यन्त्विमं let them see, समित्रज्ञातय: including his friends and relatives, बान्धवाः  kith and kin, ससुहृज्जनाः persons close to him, दीनमङ्गवैरूप्यकर्शितम् disfigured and deformed by such handicap, प्रदीप्तेन by the flamimg, लाङ्गूलेन by the tail, रक्षोभिः by the demons, सचत्वरम् the road junctions, सर्वम् all over, पुरम् the city, परिणीयताम् take him round, राक्षसेन्द्रः demon king, आज्ञापयत् ordered. 
5::53::5::तस्य his, तत् that, वचनम् word, श्रुत्वा having heard, कोपकर्शिताः brutally angry, राक्षसाः demons, जीर्णैः tatters, कार्पासकैः of cotton, पटैः  with tatters, लाङ्गूलम् his tail, वेष्टयन्ति स्म wrapped.  
5::53::6::लाङ्गूले while that tail, संवेष्ट्यमाने was being swathed, महाकपिः great vanara, वनेषु  in the woods, शुष्कम् dried, इन्धनम् firewood,आसाद्य caught, हुताशनः इव like the fire, व्यवर्धत grew in size.
5::53::7::अथ and then, ते those, तैलेन with oil, परिषिच्य having soaked, तत्र there, अग्निम् in fire, अभ्यपातयन् threw fire at his tail, बालसूर्यसमाननः his face looking like the rising Sun, रोषामर्षपरीतात्मा overtaken with anger and indignation, प्रदीप्तेन burning, लाङ्गूलेन by the tail, तान् राक्षसान् those demons, अपातयत् struck. 
5::53::8::तस्य हनूमतः of that Hanuman, सम्प्रदीप्तम् burning, लाङ्गूलम् tail, द्रष्टुम् to see, निशाचराः the demons, प्रीताः joyfully, सहस्त्रीबालवृद्धाश्च including children, women and the old, जग्मुः went out to see. 
5::53::9::वीरः hero, सः हरिसत्तमः that great monkey, सङ्गतैः (ogres) collected around him, क्रूरैः cruel, राक्षसैः with ogres, भूयः again, निबद्धः bound, तत्कालसदृशीम् appropriate to the moment, मतिम् thought, कृतवान् thought over thus.
5::53::10::रक्षसाः ogres, निबद्धस्यापि even if they bind, मे me, न शक्ताः are not able, कामं खलु indeed, अहम् I, पुनः again, पाशान् bonds, छित्त्वा after severing, समुत्पत्य leap, इमान् these, हन्याम् I will kill.  
5::53::11::भर्तुः of my lord's, हितार्थाय for the welfare, चरन्तम् while moving, एते दुरात्मनः these evil minded ones, भर्तृशासनात् by the order of their lord, बध्नन्ति यदि if they are binding, मे to me, निष्कृतिः escape, न कृता not be able to do 
5::53::12::युधि in battle, अहम् I, सर्वेषामेव for all of them, राक्षसानाम् for the ogres, पर्याप्तः enough, किन्तु but, रामस्य Rama's, प्रीत्यर्थम् for his pleasure, अहम् I, ईदृशम् such, लङ्का Lanka, पुनरेव once again, चारयितव्या going about, भवेत् will be, इति in this way, विषहिष्ये I will tolerate. 
5::53::13::लङ्का Lanka, दुर्गकर्मविधानतः acquiring knowledge of the fortification of the city, रात्रौ in the night, सुदृष्टा well observed, न हि not indeed, निशाक्षये at the end of the night, मया by me, अवश्यमेव surely, द्रष्टव्या should be seen. 
5::53::14::भूयः again, बद्धस्य bound, मे for me, पुच्छस्य tail, उद्दीपनेन च by burning the same, रक्षांसि demons, कामम् surely, पीडाम् torment, कुर्वन्तु they may as they wish, मे me, मनसः mind, श्रमः exhausted, नास्ति not experienced. 
5::53::15::ततः then, ते राक्षसाः those ogres, हृष्टाः joyfully, संवृताकारम् contracted, सत्त्ववन्तम् very powerful, कपिकुञ्जरम् elephant among monkeys, महाकपिम् great vanara, परिगृह्य after capturing, ययुः set forth. 
5::53::16::क्रूरकर्मणः cruel in action, राक्षसाः ogres, तम् him, शङ्खभेरीनिनादैश्च by sounding conches and beating drums, स्वकर्मभिः with their actions, घोषयन्तः while announcing, तां पुरीम् that city, चारयन्ति स्म paraded him. 
5::53::17::अरिन्दमः subduer of enemies, हनुमान् Hanuman, रक्षोभिः by the ogres, अन्वीयमानः being followed, सुखम् happily, ययौ went, राक्षसानाम् of the demons, महापुरीम् great city, चारयामास ranged forth.  
5::53::18::अथ and then, महाकपिः great vanara, विचित्राणि wonderful, विमानानि towering mansions, संवृतान् secure all over, भूमिभागांश्च on the streets, सुविभक्तान् well laid out, चत्वरान् squares, अपश्यत् saw. 
5::53::19::पवनात्मजः son of the Windgod, कपिः monkey, गृहसम्बाधाः with houses, वीथीः streets, शृङ्गाटकानि च beautiful tall mansions, तथा similarly, रथ्योपरथ्याश्च highways and byways, तथैव च and similarly, गृहकान्तरान् interior paths, मेघसङ्काशान् appearing like clouds, गृहांश्च houses, ददर्श saw. 
5::53::20::सर्वे all, राक्षसाः demons, चत्वरेषु at cross roads, चतुष्केषु at altars with four pillars, तथैव च like that, राजमार्गे royal road, कपिम् monkey, चारीकः इति that he is a spy, घोषयन्ति announcing. 
5::53::21::प्रदीपितलाङ्गूलम् with blazing tail, तं हनुमन्तम् at Hanuman, दिदृक्षवः desirous to have a glance, स्त्रीबालवृद्धाः women, children and the aged, तत्र तत्र here and there, कुतूहलात् out of eagerness, निर्जग्मुः came out. 
5::53::22::ततः then, तत्र there, हनूमतः Hanuman's, लाङ्गूलाग्रे when the tip of the tail, दीप्यमाने was set on fire, विरूपाक्ष्यः uglyeyed women, ताः राक्षस्यः the shedemon, देव्याः to divine Sita, अप्रियम् unpleasant, तत् that, शंसुः informed.   
5::53::23::सीते O Sita, यः he who, ताम्रमुखः red face, कपिः monkey, त्वया by you, कृतसंवादः who conversed with you, स एषः that person, प्रदीप्तेन set on fire, लाङ्गूलेन with tail, परिणीयते taken round. 
5::53::24::वैदेही Vaidehi, आत्मापहरणोपमम् equally distressing as her abduction, क्रूरम् cruel, तत् that, वचनम् word, श्रुत्वा after hearing, शोकसन्तप्ता burning with grief, हुताशनम् firegod, उपागमत् invoked. 
5::53::25::तदा then, सा that Sita, महाकपेः of the great monkey, तस्य मङ्गलाभिमुखी wishing auspicious events, आसीत् became, विशालाक्षी largeeyed lady, प्रयता with her mind, हव्यवाहनम् Firegod, उपतस्थे invoked. 
5::53::26::पतिशुश्रूषा service to my husband, अस्ति यदि if rendered, तपः austerities, चरितम् practised, अस्ति यदि if I am, एकपत्नीत्वम् loyal to my husband, अस्ति च and so यदि if it be, त्वम् you, हनूमतः for Hanuman, शीतः cool, भव be. 
5::53::27::धीमतः of the wise, तस्य Rama's, मयि towards me, किञ्चित् even a little, अनुक्रोशः compassion, अस्ति यदि if he has, मे my, भाग्यशेषः any good luck, यदि वा if there is, हनूमतः to Hanuman, शीतः cool, भव be. 
5::53::28::धर्मात्मा righteous, सः he, माम् to me, वृत्तसम्पन्नाम् pure in mind, तत्समागमलालसाम् that I am longing to unite with him, विजानाति यदि if he believes, हनूमतः to Hanuman, शीतः cool, भव be. 
5::53::29::आर्यः noble one, सत्यसङ्गरः  who is true to his promise in warfare, सुग्रीवः Sugriva, अस्मात् from, दुःखाम्बुसंरोधात् from this ocean of agony, माम् me, तारयेद्यदि is going to rescue, हनूमतः for Hanuman, शीतः cool, भव be. 
5::53::30::ततः then, अनलः Firegod, मृगशाबाक्ष्याः to the fawneyed lady, कपेः to the monkey, शिवम् auspicious, शंसन्निव as if assuring, तीक्ष्णार्चिः with intense flame, प्रदक्षिणशिखः with tips of flames moving, अव्यग्रः steadily, जज्वाल glowed. 
5::53::31::हनुमज्जनकः the father of Hanuman, Windgod अनिलः the Firegod, पुच्छानलयुतः burning tail of Hanuman, देव्याः to the divine lady, स्वास्थ्यकरः to calm her down, प्रालेयानिलशीतलः cool like the wind blowing from the snow, ववौ blew.
5::53::32::लाङ्गूले when the tail, दह्यमाने when it was ablaze, वानरः vanara, चिन्तयामास thought, सर्वतः on every side, प्रदीप्तः kindled अयम् this अग्निः fire, माम् me, कस्मात् why not me, न दहति is not burning. 
5::53::33::महाज्वालः huge flame, दृश्यते seeing, मे my, रुजम् न करोति च is not hurting me, लाङ्गूलाग्रे at the end of my tail, शिशिरस्य like the coolness, सङ्घातः like mass of ice, प्रतिष्ठितः इव is placed.
5::53::34::अथवा or else, यत् such an incident, प्लवता while I leaped, मया  by me, रामप्रभावात् by the power of Rama, पर्वत: a mountain, सरितां पतौ foating in the ocean, आश्चर्यम् wonderful, दृष्टम् saw, तत इदम् that this, व्यक्तम् now It is clear. 
5::53::35::समुद्रस्य for the ocean, धीमतः of the wise, मैनाकस्य for Mainaka, रामार्थम् for the cause of Rama, तादृक् such, सम्भ्रमः यदि if there was anxiety, अग्निः fire, किम् what, न करिष्यति not do? 
5::53::36::सीतायाः Sita's, अनृशंस्येन by the steadfast chaste character, राघवस्य Rama's, तेजसा by lustre, मम पितुः my father's, सख्येन with friend, पावकः fire, माम् me, न दहति not burning. 
5::53::37::कपिकुञ्जरः an elephantmonkey, सः महाकपिः the great monkey, भूयः once more, चिन्तयामास thought, अथ then, वेगेन with speed, उत्पपात sprang up, ननाद च roarshouted aloud. 
5::53::38::ततः then, श्रीमान् the illustrious, अनिलात्मजः the son of the Windgod (Hanuman), शैलशृङ्गमिव like the peak of a mountain, उन्नतम् lofty, विभक्तरक्षस्सम्बाधम्  turned away the demons, पुरद्वारम् entrance of the city, आससाद reached. 
5::53::39::आत्मवान् assumed original form, सः that, शैलसङ्काशः appearing like a mountain, भूत्वा becoming, क्षणेन in a moment, ह्रस्वताम् very small, प्राप्तः became, बन्धनानि all bondage, अवशातयत् casting off.    
5::53::40::श्रीमान् illustrious, विमुक्तश्च relieved of bondage, पुनः again, पर्वतसन्निभः grew like a mountain, अभवत् became, वीक्षमाणश्च looking around, तोरणाश्रितम् near the archway, परिघम् iron club, ददृशे saw. 
5::53::41::महाबाहुः strongarmed, सः मारुतिः that Maruti, कालयासपरिष्कृतम् made of black Iron, तम् the club, पुनः again, गृह्य seizing, सर्वान् all, तान् रक्षिणः all the guards, सूदयामास killed. 
5::53::42::रणचण्डविक्रमः of fearsome valour in war, सः he, तान् those, निहत्त्वा having killed, पुनरेव once again, लङ्काम् at Lanka, समीक्षमाणः while gazing, प्रदीप्तलाङ्गूलकृतार्चिमाली garlanded by the flames of his tail, अर्चिमाली garlanded by rays, आदित्य इव just like Sun, प्रकाशत shining. 
