5::1::1::Hanuman, crusher of enemies resolved to find the whereabouts of Sita, carried away by Ravana. He followed the path of the Charanas, celestial bards.
5::1::2::Hanuman who raised his head and neck, intending to cross the formidable ocean which none else could accomplish, looked like a leading bull.
5::1::3::Tawnyhued Hanuman, gifted with extraordinary strength and patience happily strolled on the marshy tracts of grassy land which had the colour of vaidurya.
5::1::4::Wise Hanuman went about like a lion scaring away birds, uprooting trees with his chest, and trampling many animals.
5::1::5::The mountain was as though decorated with mineral rocks of varied colours like blue, red, yellow and green as well as black and white৷৷It was frequently visited  by yakshas, kinneras, gandharvas and nagas surrounded by their retinue, capable of assuming any form at their free will rivalling gods and nagas in splendour.
5::1::6::As the monkey leader stood at the foot of the great mountain filled with lordly elephants he looked like an elephant standing at the centre of a pond.
5::1::7::Offering salutations with folded palms to the Sungod, to Mahendra, lord of the gods, to the windgod, to the Creator Brahma and to all the attendants of lord Siva, made up his mind to proceed (to Lanka).
5::1::8::Hanuman, endowed with great equanimity, facing the east and joining his palms by way of salutaion to the Windgod, his father, he enlarged his size  and turned south in order to depart.
5::1::9::Having made up his mind to leap for the cause of Rama, Hanuman began to grow in size just as the sea grows during the fullmoon and newmoon days, while the monkey troops were watching. 
5::1::10::Having swollen to an immeasurable figure, he pressed on the mountain with his feet and hands in an attempt to cross the ocean.
5::1::11::Pressed firmly by Hanuman, the mountain was shaken for a moment which caused the flowers to drop down from the tree tops.
5::1::12:: With heaps of flowers full of fragrance fallen down from the trees all over the mountain, it looked as though it was a mountain of flowers.
5::1::13::The mountain pressed hard under the feet of the valiant (Hanuman), discharged streams of water just as an elephant in rut would exude water of intoxication. 
5::1::14::Pressed by the powerful Hanuman, mount Mahendra let out streams of the hue of gold and silver (containing the ores of these minerals)৷৷ 
5::1::15::The mountain threw down big boulders along with sulphur just like fire emits columns of smoke, surrounded by flames.
5::1::16::Squeezed on all sides of the mountain by Hanuman, all creatures living in the caves shrieked making horrible sounds .
5::1::17::Due to the crushing of the mountain, a loud noise of the various creatures shot up filling the earth in all directions and groves around.
5::1::18:: The snakes spread out their broad hoods manifesting swastika marks on them and bit the rocks with their fangs pouring out terrible fire.
5::1::19::Bitten by the venomous and angry snakes, the mountain was broken into a thousand pieces by the blazing flames.
5::1::20::Even the medicinal herbs grown on the mountain could not neutralize the effect of the poison of snakes.
5::1::21::Even the ascetics left the place approaching that the mountain would be broken into pieces by creatures. The alarmed vidyadharas leaped into the sky along with groups of their women, leaving behind golden jugs of wine as well as precious utensils, big and small sizes, and golden goblets, cups in the drinking place, as well as many tasty eatables like licking food, chewing food and many types of meat. They also left bullhides and swords with golden sheaths. 
5::1::22::The intoxicated vidyadharas with eyes red like lotuses, wearing garlands around the neck and smeared with red sandalpaste flew into the sky.
5::1::23::Adorned with necklaces, anklets and armlets, the vidyadharis stayed wonderstruck in the sky, smiling gently in the company of their lovers.
5::1::24::The seers among the Vidyadharas, proficient in different fields of knowledge were also watching the mountain from the sky along with others.
5::1::25::Then the vidyadharas heard the words of praise(of Hanuman) by the sages, seekers of the ultimate truth, the charanas and the siddhas who stood and watched in the clear sky: 
5::1::26::Hanuman the son of the Windgod, who is like a mountain, with extraordinary might  intends to cross the ocean, the abode of crocodiles.
5::1::27::For the sake of Rama and the vanaras he wants to reach the other shore of the ocean, which is difficult, and indeed impossible.
5::1::28::The vidyadharas heard the sages speaking in that manner on the mountain. They beheld Hanuman, the bull among vanaras, whose strength  was beyond measure.
5::1::29::Hanuman, huge as a mountain moved his body and shook the hair on his body, thundering like a cloud. 
5::1::30::Like the king of birds Garuda would shake a serpent, he shook his tail covered with hair in order to take off.
5::1::31::Hanuman had the tail curled at his back which appeared like a big serpent being carried off by Garuda.
5::1::32::The monkey fixed his arms, looking like iron clubs, firmly on the mountain and crouched his waist and contracted his feet.
5::1::33::The glorious and courageous Hanuman his head and shoulders contracted, summoned up all his energy and vigour.
5::1::34::Having cast his eyes upward in order to view the distance and direction in which he had to leap, he restrained his breath in the chest while looking at the sky.
5::1::35::A mighty elephant among vanaras, Hanuman holding his feet firmly and standing in that position, contracted his ears and addressed the monkeys, when he was about to leap:
5::1::36::Just like an arrow released by Raghava would fly, I too will proceed with the speed of the wind to reach Lanka ruled by Ravana.
5::1::37::If I am not able to find the  daughter of Janaka at Lanka I will go to heaven, abode of the gods, with the same speed.
5::1::38::If I do not find Sita in heaven in spite of my efforts, I will bind that king of demons, Ravana and bring him here.
5::1::39::I will, by all means return successful with Sita or else I will uproot Lanka along with Ravana and bring him here.
5::1::40::Having thus addressed the monkeys the foremost of vanaras,Hanuman endowed with great speed leaped without any exertion. The elephant among monkeys felt like Garuda.
5::1::41::When he took off, numerous trees on the mountain drawing together the branches all over flew along with him. 
5::1::42:: He swept away the lapwings in heat on the blossoms of the trees by the speed of his thighs while he coursed through the cloudless sky.	 
5::1::43::Swept away by the force of his thighs, the trees bent forward following him for a while just as relatives accompany their kith and kin on long travel.
5::1::44::Uprooted by the force of Hanuman's thighs,great trees like  sala followed him just like the troops follow the king.
5::1::45::With numerous trees laden with flowers following him, Hanuman who looked like a mountain, presented a queer spectable.
5::1::46::Then the huge trees sank into the ocean of salt water even as mountains did, afraid of Indra's (thunderbolt).
5::1::47::Covered with tender sprouts and buds of different kinds of flowers Hanuman shone brightly like a flying mountain with fireflies.
5::1::48::Shedding their blossoms (under his thrust) the trees dropped into the waters of the sea just like close relatives follow at the time of farewell.
5::1::49::Driven by the wind caused by Hanuman's speed a variety of flowers fell into the ocean because of their light weight and the ocean looked colourful and bright like the starspangled sky.
5::1::50::Covered with blossoms of different kinds and colours, Hanuman looked like a cloud brightened by lightnings in the sky.
5::1::51::The seawater looked splendid with flowers dropped by dint of his speed. It  resembled the firmament spangled with enchanting stars just risen in the sky.
5::1::52::That great Vanara appeared as if he was gulping the entire ocean with its rising waves. While he was looking upward it appeared as though he was keen to drink in the sea as well. 
5::1::53::While he was looking upward, that great vanara appeared as if, parched with thirst, he was gulping the entire ocean with its rising waves.
5::1::54::As he was moving in the sky following the direction of the wind, his eyes blazed like two fires burning on the mountain, flashing like lightning.
5::1::55::The large, round, reddishbrown eyes of Hanuman shed their bright light like the rising Moon and Sun.
5::1::56::By the reflection of his copperyred nose, his face looked red like the Sun's orb coming close at twilight.
5::1::57::As the son of the Windgod was flying through the sky, his coiled up tail looked splendid like the banner installed at the festival in honour of Indra (on the fifteenth day of the month of Bhadrapada).
5::1::58::With his white teeth and curled up tail, the wise son of the Windgod looked splendid like the halo of the Sungod.
5::1::59::The great monkey with copperred buttocks (other parts being dark) looked splendid like a cleft mountain with a huge deposit of minerals shining red.
5::1::60::The wind passing through the arm pits of the lionlike vanara crossing the ocean sounded like a thundering cloud.
5::1::61::The elephantlike monkey was seen darting across the ocean(going from north to south) like a meteor risen in the north  along with its tailend falling down the sky.
5::1::62::The vanara expanded into an enormous size form appeared as though moving like the setting Sun. He looked like a huge elephant bound round the waist.
5::1::63::When the vanara was flying in the sky, his shadow reflected in the ocean looked like a ship driven by the wind and sailing on the sea below (as if the lower part of his body was under water and upper part occupied the sky)
5::1::64::Whichever part of the sea over which that monkey flew, it appeared as though it was riotous with eddies, whirlpools and revolving foam etc., stirred up by the speed of his thighs.
5::1::65::As the great vanara was flying swiftly, the oceanic waves in rows dashing against his chest rose as high as the  mountain.
5::1::66::The forceful wind generated by the monkey moving swiftly, and by the clouds agitated the ocean violently, creating dreadful sounds.
5::1::67::As the tiger among the monkeys pushed the big network of waves of the saltwater ocean and leaped forward, it appeared as if  he was drawing the intermediary space dividing the earth and the sky.
5::1::68::Hanuman moving along in high speed looked as if he was counting the mighty waves risen ike Meru and Mandara mountains.
5::1::69::Then the water raised by his onrush along with the cloud widely spread in the sky shone like an outstreched autumnal cloud.
5::1::70::On account of the seawater rising up,  the whales, crocodiles, fish and tortoises laid bare like the limbs of the body disrobed.
5::1::71::Seeing Hanuman, the tiger among vanaras, coursing through the sky the serpents in their seaabode mistook him for Garuda.
5::1::72::The shadow of Hanuman, the lion among monkeys, thirty yojanas long and ten yojanas in breadth appeared more pleasing৷৷
5::1::73::The broad shadow of the son of the Windgod in the sea following him shone like a dark row of clouds sailing in the pristine sky.
5::1::74::Hanuman the great vanara, splendid with a huge body coursing through the air seemed like a winged mountain flying the sky without any support.
5::1::75::As the powerful monkey, an elephant among vanaras, was proceeding swiftly along, the ocean got instantly transformed into a trough on account of water swelling by the force of his flight. 
5::1::76::Hanuman was found pulling clusters of big clouds along with him like the Windgod and appeared like Garuda,the king of birds, drawing flocks of birds along with him at the time of landing.
5::1::77::While Hanuman was drawing big clouds which were either white or red or blue or yellow, he looked charming.
5::1::78:: Entering into and emerging from the clouds, he looked like the Moon that appears and disappears (behind a bank of clouds).
5::1::79::Then seeing Hanuman crossing quickly, the gods, gandharvas and demons rained flowers on him.
5::1::80::The Sun spared Hanuman from the heat and even the Windgod served him, blowing cool while he was taking leaps in order to fulfil Rama's mission.
5::1::81::The sages praised him while he was coursing through the sky, the gods and gandharvas sang in praise of him extolling his majesty and vigour.
5::1::82::Observing the unwearied monkey the nagas, yakshas, the demons (protecting the southwest), the learned sages and birds praised him.
5::1::83::While the monkeychief was leaping (across the sea) the Seagod wished the wellbeing of the Ikshvaku family and honoured him. (The Seagod belonged to the same race) :
5::1::84::'If I fail to help the monkeychief, the wise will blame me'.
5::1::85::'I expanded on account of a scion of the Ikshvaku race (Sagara) and I should not do anything to make him (Hanuman) suffer since he is the minister helping the Ikshvaku race'.
5::1::86::'I will have to make arrangements for his rest. Later he can resume his journey comfortably'.
5::1::87::Having resolved in his mind, the Seagod addressed the noble, golden mount Mainaka, hidden in the sea:
5::1::88::'O foremost mountain you are kept here by Indra, lord of the gods as a barrier against the intrusion of demons residing in the netherworld.
5::1::89::You are staying at the entrance preventing the violent demons of the immeasurable nether world from jumping onto the surface.
5::1::90::O noble mountain you have the capacity to grow across, upward and downward by your free will. I therefore prompt you to grow.
5::1::91::Valiant Hanuman, a tiger among monkeys and a performer of dreadful deeds, is  flying over you to fulfil Rama's mission 
5::1::92::I should help him for he is working for the welfare of the Ikshavaku family. The Ikshvaku kings are worthy of adoration to me and for you as well.
5::1::93::You may act as our minister and let us not miss this chance. Pious men lose their cool if a worthy act is left unfulfilled.
5::1::94::Rise up from the waters. Let him rest on you since this noble monkey is our guest and worthy of worship.
5::1::95::O goldenpeaked mountainyou are the refuge of the gods and gandharvas. Let him also rest on you for a while before he negotiates the remaining part of the journey.
5::1::96::You ought to rise up if you consider the nobility of the scion of the Kakusthas, the deportation of Mythili, and the exertion put forth by Hanuman, the lord of monkeys.
5::1::97::Hearing the command of the god of the ocean, mount Mainaka, rich in gold and covered with trees and creepers rose up at once from the water.
5::1::98::Just as the rising Sun comes out with glowing rays tearing the veil of dark clouds, the mountain rose up from the water of the ocean.
5::1::99::At the instance of Varuna, (the presiding deity of the ocean) the lofty mountain appeared, projecting its peaks, hitherto submerged in the water. The golden peaks inhabited by nagas and kinnaras resemmbled the rising Sun as though scraping the sky in a moment.
5::1::100::The sky shone like barnished weapons smeared with the golden colour of the  mountain peaks that rose up above the water.
5::1::101::The noble mountain, Mainaka was glittering  like a thousand Suns with selfeffulgent golden peaks shining.
5::1::102::Hanuman considered the mountain rising up in the midst of the ocean and standing in front an impediment.
5::1::103::The great vanara,who was swift in action felled down the mountain that had risen high instantly with his chest just as the wind would strike a cloud.
5::1::104::Felled by the vanara's speed, the tall mountain overwhelmed with joy roared in high pitch.
5::1::105::Now the mountain assumed a human form  and standing on its own summit, which stood very high, and glad at heart, addressed the heroic vanara gone to the aerial region.
5::1::106::O best of vanaras you have achieved a formidable deed. Alighting on my peak and comfortably resting awhile, you may resume your journey.
5::1::107::The son of Rama's family, Sagara, has extended the ocean in the past.It is most appropriate that he (the god of the sea) honours you in return as you have set out in the service of Rama.
5::1::108::
5::1::109::I was prompted by the ocean for your sake since he has great regard for you. O great monkey you may rest here for a while and continue your journey. The lord of the ocean feels that this tiger among monkeys can cover the distance of a hundred yojanas. He tells me, 'let him rest on your peak and then cover the rest of the distance'.
5::1::110::O foremost of the monkeys after eating plenty of sweet and tasty roots and fruits and resting a while you may go.
5::1::111::O chief of monkeys, indeed we too have a relationship with you based on merit  which is wellknown to all the three worlds. 
5::1::112:: O son of the Windgod you are an elephant among monkeys, the foremost among them who move at a high speed.
5::1::113::Even a newcomer, however ordinary, deserves worship by a wise man who wishes to educate himself in the path of righteousness. Needless to say that distinguished guest like you deserves all reverence.
5::1::114::O foremost among the vanaras you are the son of the highsouled Windgod's, preeminent among the gods, you are also equal to him in speed.
5::1::115::O knower of righteousness to worship you is to honour the Windgod. Therefore you are worthy of worship for me. I will tell you the reason. Listen.
5::1::116::Formerly in Kritayuga, O dear, mountains were endowed with wings. They used to move speedily in all directions like Garuda and the Windgod.
5::1::117::When they moved about, even hosts of sages, gods and creatures panicked for fear of falling down (and destroying all worlds).
5::1::118::Provoked at this, the thousandeyed Indra who had performed a hundred sacrifices cut off the wings of mountains into a thousands pieces with his thunderbolt.
5::1::119::
5::1::120::O distinguished vanara your father, the Windgod threw me down into this saltwater sea. Thus my wings were protected.
5::1::121::O esteemed vanara the Windgod is revered by me and so I honour you. O chief of monkeys, my bondage with you is therefore of high value to me, indeed.
5::1::122::O great monkey when I hold you so high, you ought to oblige me and the (god of the) ocean wholeheartedly (and accept our hospitalty).
5::1::123::O noble monkey oblige us by accepting our offering given with love and be relieved of your fatigue. Your presence itself is welcome to me.
5::1::124::The great Hanuman, pleased with the words of Mainaka, said I am pleased at your hospitality. Remove your unhappiness.
5::1::125::My commitment is hastening me. The day set (for the accomplishment of the task) is also drawing to a close. A vow is made and I will not halt in the middle of my work.
5::1::126::Having said this, the mighty monkey gently touched the mountain with his hands before ascending to the sky with a smile on his face.
5::1::127::The mountain and the sea honoured and adored the son of the Windgod and gave him appropriate  blessings.
5::1::128::And thereafter leaping a long distance into the clear sky, he (Hanuman) took the path of the Windgod, his father, leaving behind the mountain and the sea.
5::1::129::Rising higher and further up and looking at the mountain (which was going down into the ocean), the son of the Windgod coursed through the cloudless sky unsupported.
5::1::130:: Gods, siddhas as well as the great sages praised him for the second great achievment of Hanuman, which is impossible for others to accomplish.
5::1::131::The gods who happened to be present at that time (on the mountain) and the thousandeyed Indra were delighted by the gesture of golden Sunabha (Mainaka) mountain. 
5::1::132::Indra, the lord of Sachi, was personally satisfied and spoke to Mainaka, the best of mountains, in faltering tone, his throat choked out of joy.
5::1::133::O Hiranyanabha, the foremost among the mountains I am highly pleased with you. I give you security (free from fear of losing wings). O pious one you may stay on happily as you please.
5::1::134::You have rendered very valuable help to Hanuman who was attempting to leap  a distance of a hundred yojanas. He is fearless even when there is reason to fear (of falling down).
5::1::135::The vanara has gone on a mission to help the son of Dasaratha. I am highly pleased with the service rendered to him.
5::1::136::Thereafter Mainaka, the great mountain was delighted to see Indra,  lord of the gods, performer of a hundred yajnas satisfied. 
5::1::137::Then mount Mainaka, assured by Indra became secure. And Hanuman also crossed over the ocean in a short while.
5::1::138::Then the gods, gandharvas, siddhas and great sages approached Surasa, the mother of nagas, who was glowing like the Sungod and said:. 
5::1::139::The glorious son of the Windgod, called Hanuman, is crossing the ocean. Obstruct him for sometime by assuming the hideous form of a demon, gigantic as a mountain, fearful with yellowishbrown eyes, with big teeth and a wide mouth like the sky.
5::1::140::We want to assess his strength, valour and intelligence once again. We wish to know whether he will win or give way to despondency.
5::1::141::Thus honoured by the gods, Surasa assumed a terrific ugly form frightening to all and stood in the midst of the ocean. Putting up a distorted appearance and encompassing Hanuman who was crossing the ocean, she spoke to him:
5::1::142::O bull among vanaras the lords of the universe have provided you as food for me. I will eat you. Enter my mouth.
5::1::143::Thus addressed by Surasa,  the glorious Hanuman said this with a blooming face and folded hands:
5::1::144::Dasaratha's son called Rama accompanied by his brother Lakshmana and his wife Vaidehi entered Dandaka forest.
5::1::145::While Rama was engaged otherwise, his glorious wife Sita was abducted by Ravana actuated by deeprooted enmity of demons with him.
5::1::146::I am going as Rama's emissary to search for his wife. It is proper for you to render help since you are a resident of his kingdom.
5::1::147::
5::1::148::Having heard Hanuman, Surasa capable of taking any form at her free will told him that no one can cross (her region) as she had been given such a boon(by the Creator)৷৷  
5::1::149::Surasa, mother of serpents, observing that Hanuman was attempting to escape, said this in order to gauge his strength:
5::1::150::O best vanara you must pass through my mouth today. Such is the boon granted to me by Brahma in the past. Then she quickly opened her big mouth and stood.
5::1::151::Thus addressed by Surasa, Hanuman the supreme vanara said, Open your mouth wide enough to hold me.
5::1::152::Provoked by the words of Surasa, Hanuman stretched himself to ten yojanas.
5::1::153::Seeing his body stretched to ten yojanas like a cloud, Surasa also widened her mouth to twenty yojanas.
5::1::154::Provoked, Hanuman further stretched his body to thirty yojanas and Surasa on her own enlarged her mouth to forty yojanas. Then the great hero Hanuman stretched his body to fifty yojanas.
5::1::155::Surasa widened her mouth sixty yojanas and then the heroic Hanuman enlarged himself to seventy yojanas.
5::1::156::Surasa widened her mouth to eighy yojanas and the heroic Hanuman grew up to ninety yojanas, looking like a mountain.
5::1::157::Intelligent Hanuman observing Surasa's enlarged mouth open and dreadful like hell with a long tongue, suddenly shrunk his body to the size of a thumb.
5::1::158::Glorious and mighty  Hanuman quickly went into her mouth and got out and stood in the sky and said:.
5::1::159::O Dakshayani I have indeed entered your mouth and your boon has come true (as nobody can go against the boon of the Creator). Allow me to proceed in quest of Vaidhehi. My salutations to you.
5::1::160::Seeing Hanuman released out of her mouth like the Moon released from the mouth of Rahu, Surasa assumed her true form and said:
5::1::161::O noble vanara proceed happily to achieve your purpose. Go and unite Vaidehi with the noble self, Raghava.
5::1::162::Witnessing Hanuman achieving a very difficult feat for the third time, all the living beings applauded him saying Well done, welldone.
5::1::163::Rising above the invincible ocean, the abode of lord Varuna, Hanuman coursed through the sky speedily like Garuda.
5::1::164::Hanuman passed through the path of wind like Garuda. The region was refreshed with clouds that released torrents of rain and frequented by birds. The great masters of music (Tumburu, Narada and Gandharvas) trained in Kasika moved there driven by lions, elephants, tigers, birds and serpents and were moving in different aerial vehicles. It was splendid with god at fire who strikes fiercely like thunderbolt. It was inhabited by great sages who had acquired merit. The region was traversed by firegod who carried havis in large quantities earnestly. It was decorated with planets, constellations, Moon, Sun and clusters of stars. It was filled with groups of greal sages, gandharvas, nagas and yakshas. It was isolated part of the universe traversed by the king of gandharvas like Vishvavasu. It was an auspicious path for Moon and Sun, a sporting ground for Airavata, the vehicle of lord Indra. It was an extensive world of living beings created by Brahma. It was frequented by many heroes ascending to heaven and blocked by vidyadharas. 
5::1::165::Hanuman, son of the Windgod was seen everywhere in the sky. He appeared like a longwinged king of mountains unsupported.
5::1::166::Seeing Hanuman speeding in the sky a demoness called Simhika who can assume any form at her will had grown out of proportion and thought on her part: 
5::1::167::
5::1::168::Thinking thus, she dragged him by his shadow before she took hold of him, Hanuman started deliberating within.
5::1::169::I am caught suddenly. I am handicapped.I am like a huge ship in an ocean retarded by the wind blowing from the opposite direction.
5::1::170::Looking around, right and left, up and down, the monkey saw a huge being rise from the salty sea.
5::1::171::Seeing the form with a hideous countenance, Hanuman reflected about the creature of ugly appearance endowed with power which can catch a creature though his shadow, about which king Sugriva had once told him. 'It is the same creature, no doubt', said Hanuman.
5::1::172::Recognising the true nature of Simhika the clutcher of shadows, the wise Hanuman grew to a huge size like a cloud in rainy season.
5::1::173::Observing the body of Hanuman growing in size, Simhika started distending her mouth wide like the depth of the underworld.
5::1::174::Roaring like a heavy mass of clouds, Simhika chased Hanuman. Intelligent Hanuman observed her enormous mouth and noticed her vital parts.
5::1::175::Hanuman, the vanara whose physique was as hard as thunderbolt suddenly contracted once again and entered her opened mouth.
5::1::176::The siddhas and charanas who were watching his performance of drowning in her mouth were amazed as though the moon is seized by Rahu on a fullmoon night.
5::1::177::The vanara who had the speed of mind tore her vital parts with his sharp nails and rushed out quickly before she closed her mouth.
5::1::178::Selfcontrolled Hanuman, the great monkey acting with firmness of mind and ingenuity threw her down and once again rapidly grew in size. 
5::1::179::Heart torn asunder and killed by Hanuman, miserable Simhika instantly fell into the sea water. Observing it, the beings who ranged the sky said to the foremost of vanaras:
5::1::180::O great jumper a great deed has been done by you today in killing that fierce creature. O great monkey fulfil your mission without any obstruction.
5::1::181::O lord of vanaras he in whom these four qualities, fortitude, vision, intelligence and dexterity exist as in you will achieve his mission and not get lost. 
5::1::182::Honoured by them the venerable monkey went ascending into the sky like Garuda to achieve the objective.
5::1::183::On reaching the other side of the shore crossing  a hundred yojanas, he saw rows of forest trees. 
5::1::184::Hanuman, the best among jumpers, even while in air he saw an island adorned with many trees, also gardens adjacent to Malaya mountain.
5::1::185::Looking at the ocean, he observed the sea bordering the land and the trees grown on the marshy land in the region of the mouths of the rivers (the consorts of the sea.). Looking at his own body which was like a huge cloud as though obstructing the sky, the wise monkey of selfcontrol thought as follows. 
5::1::186::'The demons will be inquisitive to know about me seeing the extraordinary size of my body as well as my speed', thought the great monkey.
5::1::187::Then Hanuman contracted his huge mountainlike body and assumed his normal form, just as a sage who gives up ignorance on awakening .
5::1::188::Hanuman returned to his normal  form contracting to his small size, just like Lord Visnu returned to his original form after taking three strides and defeating the valour of king Bali.
5::1::189::He reached the opposite shore of the sea. He had achieved the impossible. One who could assume a variety of lovely forum, he, gazing at his own body, deliberated on the future course of action.
5::1::190::Then  the highsouled Hanuman, who resembled a huge mountain, descended on the peak of the huge mountain Trikuta, called Lamba,  which was wonderful  with kethaka flowers, uddalaka and coconut trees.
5::1::191::Reaching the sea shore, beholding Lanka located on the peak of Trikuta, Hanuman shook his body, scaring the beasts and birds and landed on the mountain.
5::1::192::Landing on the shore after crossing by his prowess the great ocean filled with demons, and serpents, adorned with garlands of waves, Hanuman beheld Lanka which was like Amaravati, the capital of Indra.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे प्रथमस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the first sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
