5::30::1::The valiant hero Hanuman heard everything including the lamentation of Sita and the dream of Trijata and the threats of the demonesses.    
5::30::2::The sight of Sita who seemed a deity in the Nandana garden of Indra, set a chain of reflections in his mind :  
5::30::3::This is Sita whom thousands of vanaras are searching in all directions.
5::30::4::Roaming everywhere incognito to ascertain carefully the strength of the enemy, I have seen everything.  
5::30::5::I have seen the ability of the demons and the citadel of Lanka. I have seen the power of Ravana the demon king.  
5::30::6::It is the opportune time for me to comfort Sita eagerly waiting to see her husband who is of immeasurable prowess and who is compassionate to all beings.
5::30::7::The moonfaced Sita had never experienced sorrow before. She sees no end to her sorrow and suffering. I will console her. 
5::30::8::If I should return to Kishkindha without reassuring Sita, whose understanding has been clouded in grief I would be blamed.
5::30::9::If I so back, this illustrious princess, Janaki will give up her life, finding no means of deliverance (from this tragic situation).
5::30::10::I should provide some comfort to the strongarmed Rama with a face like the fullmoon yearning to see Sita. 
5::30::11::I cannot talk to her in the presence of these nightroamers. How can I  discharge my duty in this predicament?   
5::30::12::If I do not comfort her before the remaining part of the night ends, she will give up her life. There is no doubt about it.   
5::30::13::If Rama enquires about the message of Sita, this lady of beautiful waist, what can I speak without meeting and talking to her?
5::30::14::If I leave this place without any message from Sita, Rama will burn me with his eyes full of great anger. 
5::30::15::If I get the lord of vanaras and his army for the cause of Rama (without talking to Sita), their arrival will be useless (if Sita would have given up her life by then).  
5::30::16::I shall wait and speak to her slowly and console this deeply distressed lady when I get a chance to speak to her (when  these ogresses are asleep).
5::30::17::I am indeed of small size and that too a monkey. Nevertheless I shall speak in Sanskrit, a language of the common people. (as the shedemons cannot understand that language).   
5::30::18::If I speak like a brahmin in sanskrit language she would be frightened thinking that I am Ravana and how would a vanara speak?
5::30::19::I will certainly speak to her meaningfully in the language of the people. Otherwise it is not possible to pacify the sinless Sita. 
5::30::20::Since Janaki has already been frightened by the demons, she will be even more terrified seeing me in this form and hearing me speaking this way.      
5::30::21::By seeing me in this form, sensitive largeeyed Sita will scream loudly thinking that I am Ravana who can assume any form at his free will.
5::30::22::If Sita screams, the  horde of terrific ogresses will at once gather, armed with dreadful weapons like Yama, the god of death.
5::30::23::Then all these hideous ogresses will swarm round me and make efforts to capture me with all their strength and kill me.   
5::30::24::Seeing me holding big and small branches of large trees and leaping from one place to the other, the ogresses will get scared.  
5::30::25::These ogresses with their hideous faces will be frightened on looking at my huge form moving in this grove. 
5::30::26::Thereafter the ogresses will draw the attention of demon guards engaged by the king of demons at his residence towards me. 
5::30::27::Those ogresses due to fear will come speedily, armed with spears, tridents, swords and different kinds of weapons for a combat.
5::30::28::With them around me, I may not be able to  reach the other end of the ocean (my strength spent in the combat.)
5::30::29::The ogres who are in large numbers, here are very prompt to act. They will jump into the sky and bind me. Sita will not receive the message and I will be taken into custody by the demons.
5::30::30::These demons who are keen on indulging in violence will harm Janaka's daughter. Then the mission of Rama and Sugriva will also fail. 
5::30::31::Janaki is staying in this untraceable location surrounded by demons. And this location is a secret place surrounded by the ocean .   
5::30::32::If I am killed in the combat or captured by the demons, I do not see another person who can help in accomplishing this task.  
5::30::33::When I am killed here, I cannot see any other vanara who can leap over a hundred yojanas of the ocean (to reach this place). 
5::30::34::I may be capable of killing even thousands of demons but thereafter (thoroughly exhausted) reach the other side of the ocean. 
5::30::35::Battles, no doubt, are unpredictable. Which wise man with a sound intellect will take up a doubtful work unhesitatingly?
5::30::36::If I talk to Vaidehi it will be a great mistake on my part.If I do not speak to Vaidehi she may give up her life.
5::30::37::Even well planned diplomatic missions fail like darkness dispelled at Sunrise if the messenger is confused and if the place and time are not propitious for them.   
5::30::38::Swinging from a course of action or an action leading to calamity is not proper. Messengers who assume that they are scholars (blinded by ego) destroy their mission.
5::30::39::How can the mission succeed? How can failure of mission be avoided? How can the crossing of the great ocean be not wasted?
5::30::40::Wise Hanuman came to a decision after reflecting in his mind about how not to create fear in Sita (while communicating with her.)
5::30::41::By praising Rama who is very dear, who is judicious in action and in whom her mind is absorbed, I will not create fear.
5::30::42::I shall present in auspicious words the esteemed Rama of Ikshvaku family who is a knower of self and make her listen to everything in such a sweet manner that she will trust me.
5::30::43::Highsouled Hanuman seated on the branch of the tree without being seen began to speak faithfully in praise of the lord of the universe in many ways while looking at her. इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे त्रिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the thirtieth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
