5::46::1::रावणः Ravana, महात्मना the great, वानरेण by the vanara, मन्त्रिसुतान् sons of the ministers, हतान् killed, बुद्द्वा knowing, संवृताकारः who had concealed his agony, उत्तमाम् good, मतिम् thought, चकार formulated.  
5::46::2::सः दशग्रीवः the tenheaded Ravana, वीरान् warriors, नयविशारदान् skilled in statecraft, हनुमद्ग्रहणव्यग्रान् eager to capture Hanuman, युथि in battle, वायुवेगसमान् equal to wind in speed, विरूपाक्षयूपाक्षौ Virupaksha and Yupaksha, दुर्धरम् Durdhara, राक्षसं चैव also a giant, प्रघसम् Praghasa, भासकर्णं च Bhaskarna and, सेनाग्रनायकान् army Generals पञ्च five,सन्दिदेश commanded.   
5::46::3::सेनाग्रगाः O Army generals, सर्वे all, महाबलपरिग्रहाः accompanied by large, strong army, सवाजिरथमातङ्गाः along with horses, chariots and elphants, यात march, सः कपिः that vanara, शास्यताम्  punish, इति thus.   
5::46::4::तम् him, वनालयम् a forestdweller, आसाद्य after reaching, यत्नैः च with all efforts, भाव्यम् should be engaged, देशकालाविरोधिनम् that which is not against time and space, कर्म चापि even action, समाधेयम् should be done.  
5::46::5::अहम् I, कर्मणा by his actions, प्रतितर्कयन् judging again and again,तम् him, कपिम् monkey, न मन्ये I do not think, सर्वथा by all its actions, तत् that, महाबलपरिग्रहम् endowed with great strength, महत् great, भूतम् a being. 
5::46::6::अस्मदर्धम् it seems to me, तपोबलात् by ascetic power, इन्द्रेण by Indra, सृष्टं वा may be created, भवेत् may be, सहितैः along with, सर्वैः by all, युष्माभिः of you, मया by me, सनागयक्षगन्धर्वाः nagas, yakshas, gandharvas,देवासुरमहर्षयः gods, demons and ascetics, विनिर्जिताः subdued, तैः by them, नः us, किञ्चिदेव even a little, व्यलीकम् harm, अवश्यम् certainly, विधातव्यम् should be done, तदेव this is same reaction, अत्र in this case, सन्देहः doubt, न no, प्रसह्य with force, परिगृह्यताम् he may be captured, धीरपराक्रमः a warrior of heroic strength, हरिः monkey, भवद्भि by you also, नावमान्यः should not be insulted. 
5::46::7::पूर्वम् earlier, मया by me, विपुलविक्रमाः of immense prowess, हरयः monkeys, सहसुग्रीवः with Sugriva, वाली च and Vali, महाबलः mighty, जाम्बवांश्च and Jambavan, सेनापतिः army chief, नीलः Nila, द्विविदादयः Dvivida and others, अन्ये च and others, ये those, दृष्टाः हि have seen, तेषाम् for them, गतिः movement, एवम् that way, भीमा tremendous, न not, तेजः splendour, पराक्रमः valour, न not, मतिः intellect, न not, बलोत्साहौ strength and energy, रूपपरिकल्पनम् ability to change form at will.
5::46::8::इदम् this, कपिरूपम् a monkey form, व्यवस्थितम् concluded, महत् great, सत्त्वम्  being, ज्ञेयम् It should be understood, महत् extraordinary, प्रयत्नम् effort, आस्थाय by putting up, अस्य his, निग्रहः capture, क्रियताम् do.
5::46::9::सेन्द्राः including Indra, ससुरासुरमानवाः suras, asuras and humans together, त्रयः all the three, लोकाः worlds, रणाजिरे in the battlefield, भवताम् your, अग्रतः in front, स्थातुम् to stand, न पर्याप्ताः not competent, कामम् indeed. 
5::46::10::तथापि तु even then, रणे in a war, जयम् victory, आकाङ्क्षता while desiring, नयज्ञेन by carefully adopting war strategies in an intelligent manner, प्रयत्नेन making effort, आत्मा your own self, रक्ष्यः should be protected, युद्धसिद्धिः victory in war, चञ्चला हि is uncertain.
5::46::11::महौजसः very strong, हुताशसमतेजसः resplendant as sacrificial fire, ते सर्वे all of them, स्वामिवचनम् king's words, प्रतिगृह्य accepting, महावेगाः who were swift, रथैः with chariots, मत्तै intoxicated, मातङ्गै: with elephants, महाजवैः of great speed, वाजिभिश्च with horses, तीक्ष्णैः sharp, विविधैः many kinds, शस्त्रै: with weapons, सर्वे all, बलैः strong army, उपचिताः collecting,समुत्पेतुः sallied forth together 
5::46::12::ततः then, वीराः heroes, स्वतेजोरश्मिमालिनम् shining like the Sungod with his own effulgence, उद्यन्तम् a rising one, रश्मिमन्तमिव like the Sun, दीप्यमानम् shining, तोरणस्थम् standing at the archway, महोत्साहम् extraordinary agility, महासत्त्वम् intelligent,महाबलम् endowed with tremendous strength, तं महाकपिम् him the vanara, ददृशुः saw.
5::46::13::सर्वे all, महामतिम् highly intelligent, महावेगम् very swift, महाकायम् having a huge body, महाबलम् tremendous strength, तम् him, समीक्ष्यैव having observed, सर्वासु in all, दिक्षु directions, अवस्थिताः positioned, ततस्ततः here and there, भीमैः with dreadful, स्तैस्तै: with different, प्रहरणैः with weapons, अभिपेतुः attacked.
5::46::14::तीक्ष्णाः sharp, शिताः sharp, पीतमुखाः steel shafts with polished yellow tips (of gold), उत्पलपत्राभाः shining like petals of lilies, आयसाः steel shafts made of iron, पञ्च five, शराः arrows, दुर्धरेण by Durdhara, तस्य his, शिरसि  on his head, निपातिताः pierced. 
5::46::15::वानरः vanara, तैः them, पञ्चभिः by those five, शरैः with arrows, शिरसि on the head, अविद्धः pierced in, नदन् roared, दशदिशः the ten directions, विनादयन् making a loud noise, व्योम्नि in the sky, उत्पपात leaped. 
5::46::16::ततः thereafter, महाबलः powerful, वीरः hero, दुर्धरः Durdhara, सरथः with his the chariot, सज्यकार्मुकः with his string fastened, तीक्ष्णैः sharp, शरशतैः hundreds of arrows, किरन् while hitting, अभिपेदे attacked. 
5::46::17::सः कपिः that vanara, व्योम्नि in the sky, शरवर्षिणम् showering of arrows, तम् on him, पयोदान्ते at the end of the rainy season, वृष्टिमन्तम् showering rain drops, पयोदम् a cloud, मारुतः इव like the wind, वारयामास prevented. 
5::46::18::तेन by him, दुर्धरेण by Durdhara, अर्ध्यमानः attacked, अनिलात्मजः son of the Windgod, ततः then, कदनम् battle, चकार fought, वेगवान् swift hero, भूयः again, व्यवर्धत  grew in size. 
5::46::19::सः हरिः that vanara, दूरं far off, सहसा at once, उत्पत्य leaped, महावेगः in high speed, गिरौ on the mountain, विद्युद्राशिरिव like flashes of lightning, दुर्धरस्य Durdhara's, रथे on the chariot, निपपात fell on. 
5::46::20::ततः then, सः he, मथिताष्टाश्वम् eight horses killed, भग्नाक्षकूबरम् with its axle and wooden frame (to which the yoke is fixed) broken, रथम् chariot, विहाय left, त्यक्तजीवितः devoid of life, भूमौ on the ground, न्यपतत् fell.  
5::46::21::दुर्धर्षौ  unassailable warriors, अरिन्दमौ  crushers of enemies, विरूपाक्षयूपाक्षौ Virupaksha and Yupaksha, भुवि on the ground, निपतितम् fallen, तम् him, दृष्ट्वा seeing, सञ्जातरोषौ enraged, उत्पेतुः leaped at him. 
5::46::22::विमले in a clear white, अम्बरे in the sky, विष्ठितः stood, महाबाहुः greatarmed one, सः कपिः that vanara, ताभ्याम् by both of them, सहसा all of a sudden, उत्पत्य having leapt, मुद्गराभ्याम् with two iron hammers, वक्षसि on the chest, अभिहतः  hit. 
5::46::23::महाबलः powerful, सुपर्णसमविक्रमः equal to Suparna (Garuda) in valour, वेगवतोः of those two who were swift in action, तयोः of both of them, वेगम् speed, विनिहत्य resisting, पुनः again, भूमौ on the ground, निपपात fell. 
5::46::24::वानरः vanara, सः पवनात्मजः that son of the Windgod, सालवृक्षम् sala tree, आसाद्य seized, तम् that, उत्पाट्य च and uprooted, तौ उभौ both of them, वीरौ generals, राक्षसौ two giants,जघान slew. 
5::46::25::ततः then, तरस्विना by the swift, वानरेण by the vanara, तान् त्रीन् those three, हतान् killed, ज्ञात्वा after knowing, प्रघसः Praghasa, महावेगः endowed with swift action, प्रसह्य violently, अभिपेदे attacked, वीर्यवान् courageous, भासकर्णश्च with Bhasakarna, सङ्कृद्धः angry one, शूलम् trident, आदाय by lifting.  
5::46::26::यशस्विनम् renowned, कपिशार्दूलम् tiger among monkeys, एकतः on one side, अवस्थितम् तम् stationed, प्रघसः Praghasa, शिताग्रेण with sharp weapon, पट्टिसेन iron crowbar, कपिसत्तमम् foremost of the monkeys, प्रत्ययोधयत् fought back, भासकर्णः Bhaskarna, राक्षसः giant, शूलेन with spear. 
5::46::27::ताभ्याम् by both of them, विक्षतैः with wounded ones, गात्रैः with his limbs, असृग्दिग्धतनूरुहः his fur smeared with blood, सः वानरः that vanara, बालसूर्यसमप्रभः was shining like the rising Sun, क्रुद्धः angry, अभवत् became. 
5::46::28::कपिकुञ्जरः a mighty elephant among the monkeys, वीरः courageous, हनुमान् Hanuman, समृगव्यालपादपम् along with animals serpents and trees, गिरेः शृङ्गम् mountain peak, समुत्पाट्य having uprooted, राक्षसौ both the giants,जघान  killed. 
5::46::29::ततः then, तेषु those, पञ्चसु all the five, सेनापतिषु army chiefs, अवसन्नेषु when they died, वानरः vanara, तत् that, अवशेषम् remaining, बलम् army, नाशयामास destroyed. 
5::46::30::सः कपिः that vanara,सहस्राक्षः thousandeyed Indra, असुरानिव as he did (destroyed) demons, अश्वैः with horses, अश्वान् horses, गजैः with elephants, नागान् elephants, योधैः with warriors, योधान् warriors, रथैः with chariots, रथान् chariots, नाशयामास destroyed. 
5::46::31::हतैः with killed ones, नागैः with elephants, तुरगैः with horses, भग्नाक्षैः with broken axles, महारथैश्च by great chariots, हतैः with smashed ones, राक्षसैः with giants, भूमिः the ground, समन्ततः all over, रुद्धमार्गा the path was obstructed  
5::46::32::ततः then, वीरः the hero, कपिः monkey, वीरान् the generals, सबलान्  along with that army, सवाहनान् their vehicles, तान् those, ध्वजिनीपतीन् army chiefs, रणे in war, निहत्य having killed, समीक्ष्य after reviewing, तोरणम् archway, परिगृह्य after holding, प्रजाक्षये  bent upon destruction of humanity, कालः इव like timespirit, कृतक्षणः celebrated.
