5::3::1::The mighty son of the Windgod, intelligent Hanuman, an elephant among vanaras, standing on the peak of the Lamba which looked like a high rainbearing cloud and relying on his energy, entered by night the city of Lanka, ruled by Ravana  rich in delightful forests, groves and water pools.
5::3::2::Hanuman, happy to reach Lanka, stood on its rampart and surveyed the city of land which was splendid with beautiful mansions overcast with autumnal clouds pierced by glittering streaks of lightning, served by planets and stars with mild winds blowing (out of fear of Ravana), with the roaring sounds of the sea and with a wellfed army like Vitapavati (that is Alaka, the capital of Kubera, halfbrother of Ravana and the treasurer of celestials),  which had elephants sationed at the outer gates, provided with white archways and protected by serpents like the auspicious city of Bhogavati (capital of Patala). Surrounded by a golden rampart, the city resembled Amaravati, the capital of Indra, decorated with flags fluttering, echoing with the jingling sounds of small bells.
5::3::3::Surveying all over, Hanuman was wonderstruck to see as though it was leaping into the sky. The city had golden shutters, altars encrusted with vaidurya, mansions inlaid with diamonds, crystals, pearls and other gems, crowned with pure gold and silver. The staircases built with silver were studded with vaidurya. The beautiful quadrangles, coverd with grains of crystal were as though leaping into the air. It echoed with sounds of krauncha birds, peacocks and royal swans. Filled with sounds of musical instruments, it resembled the city of Vaswokasara.
5::3::4::Gazing at the enchanting, auspicious, prosperous city of the king of demons mighty Hanuman began to reflect:
5::3::5::'It is not possible to attack this city by to outsiders as it is protected by the forces of Ravana with their weapons ready(to attack).
5::3::6::'This land can be reached by Kumuda and Angada or the great vanara Sushena and even by Mainda and Dvivida.
5::3::7::'Son of Vivaswan (Sugriva), the chief of vanaras, Kushaparva, Riksha (Jambavan) and myself also will be able to reach this place.
5::3::8::Reflecting upon the valour of longarmed Rama and valiant advances of Lakshmana Hamuman felt pleased (within himself).
5::3::9::Hanuman looked at the city of the demon king, whose darkness was dispelled by bright gems and mighty mansions as if it were a young maiden. The prosperous city was like a well decorated woman, adorned with ornaments having walls for her dress, the stables for her earrings, the armouries for her breasts.
5::3::10::Assuming her real form the presiding deity of Lanka noticed the son of the Windgod, the tiger among vanaras of great prowess entering the city.
5::3::11::Seeing the best of vanaras, the deity of the city of Lanka, ruled by Ravana rose up before him in a distorted form.
5::3::12::She stood in front of the son of the Windgod and spoke to him in a loud voice.
5::3::13::O dweller of the forest, who are you? Why did you come here? Speak the truth about your identity, so long as you hold on to your life.
5::3::14::O vanara this Lanka is a secret place protected by Ravana's army everywhere. It is surely not possible for you to enter this city.
5::3::15::Then Hanuman who was standing in front of her said, I will tell you the truth since you are asking me.
5::3::16::Who are you, terrible woman of ugly, distorted eyes? Why are you obstructing me at the gate of the city? Why do you impound upon me?
5::3::17::The spirit of Lanka who could assume any form at her will got enraged on hearing the words of Hanuman and spake in a harsh tone.
5::3::18::In obedience to the orders of the great demon king, Ravana, I am protecting this unassailable city.
5::3::19:: It is not possible for you to enter this city ignoring my presence. Soon you will be killed. You will give up your life and attain eternal sleep.
5::3::20::O monkey I am the presiding ogress of Lanka presenting myself personally. I  am to protect this city. This is my answer to you.
5::3::21::On hearing the words of ogress of Lanka, the son of the Windgod stood up ready and appeared like another mountain.
5::3::22::Seeing the monster of a woman, the powerful Hanuman, bull among vanaras endowed with wisdom spoke to her.
5::3::23::I would like to see this Lanka with marketplaces, gateways and ramparts. I have come here for that purpose. My curiosity has been roused to see this place.
5::3::24::I have arrived here to see Lanka's gardens, groves and forests and also all the important houses.
5::3::25::On hearing Hanuman, the ogress of Lanka, who could assume any form, replied in harsh words:
5::3::26::O evilminded, foolish monkey It is not possible for you to enter the city ruled by Ravana, the king of demons without conquering me.
5::3::27::The tiger among monkeys said to the, the nightwalker O noble Lanka I shall see this city and go back.
5::3::28::Then the ogress of Lanka made a loud and frightening sound and struck the most powerful vanara  with the palm of her hand.
5::3::29::At this strong slap, the heroic Hanuman, son of the Windgod roared loudly.
5::3::30::Overcome by anger, Hanuman clenched the fingers of his left hand and hit her with his fist. Considering her to be, after all, a woman he did not turn outrageous.
5::3::31:: Struck by the blow of Hanuman the demoness fell down on the ground at once, her limbs shattered, her face distorted. 
5::3::32::Wise and brilliant Hanuman, seeing the deity fallen down, left her (without killing her) out of compassion, thinking that she is a woman, after all.
5::3::33::Thereafter, the deflated demoness of Lanka with an agitated voice, said to Hanuman, the monkeyhero:
5::3::34::O, strongshouldered great monkey be gracious. Save me. Heroes endowed with great strength stay back when the time comes.
5::3::35:: O monkey I am Lanka incarnate. You have conquered me by your strength and valour.
5::3::36::O lord of vanaras in the past Creator Brahma had given me a boon which has come true. I will tell you. listen.
5::3::37::'When a vanara vanquishes you by his prowess, you may know that destruction of ogres will set in.
5::3::38::O gentle one the time ordained by Brahma has come today with your presence  here. The truth revealed by Brahma, the selfborn, cannot be proved otherwise.
5::3::39::The ruin of all demons and evilminded king Ravana will take place due to (the abduction of) Sita.
5::3::40::O great vanara enter the city ruled by Ravana and accomplish your purpose.
5::3::41::O lord of vanaras you may search for the chaste lady, daughter of king Janaka all over freely entering this doomed city, ruled by the chief of demons.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायाणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे तृतीयस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the third sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
