5::61::1::In the midst of all the leaders of the monkeys including Angada, Hanuman accepted Jambavan's advice.
5::61::2::Thereafter led by Hanuman, all the vanaras left Mahendra mountain and marched very happily. The vanaras were strong and huge like elephants and resembled mountain Meru. Moreover when they leaped up they seemed to cover the sky (so it was difficult to tell their numbers). Since Hanuman had accomplished the task, the vanaras were praising his strength, his swiftness and courage. They were looking at Hanuman without blinking their eyes, and seemed as though they were carrying him by their eyes. They were determined in their minds to please Rama. Remaining in a state of offering themselves, some of them more accomplished than others, collected together eager to wage war and talking pleasantly among themselves having resolved to assist Rama.
5::61::3::The monkeys leaped into the sky and entered the garden that resembled the garden of Indra filled with trees and creepers.
5::61::4::The Madhuvanam of Sugriva was wellprotected  and was difficult to access for the vanaras. It was enchating to all beings.
5::61::5::Dadhimukha, the foremost of all monkeys, of great valour and the maternal uncle of Sugriva was the caretaker of  the garden.
5::61::6::On reaching the vanara king's extensive, delightful garden all the vanaras highly rejoiced.
5::61::7::The honeycoloured monkeys felt happy on seeing the Madhuvanam and sought Angada's permission to drink honey.
5::61::8::Young Angada asked old Jambavan's permission for the vanaras to drink honey and Jambavan permitted them.
5::61::9::Permitted thus to drink honey the forestdwelling monkeys were motivated. They rejoiced very happily and started dancing.
5::61::10::Some sang, some prostrated on the ground, some danced, while some laughed, some jumped from the tree, some roamed about and some jumped up and down.
5::61::11::While some supported one another, some held each other, some exchanged secrets with one another, some entertained one another.
5::61::12::While some ran from one tree to another, some jumped down from broken branches, and some swiftfooted ones fell down from the top of trees.
5::61::13::While one was singing, others approached him laughing while some were laughing others fell on them laughing excessively. While some were roaring, others went pushing them down. While some were encouraged to do something others shouted at them.
5::61::14::The army of monkeys had lost control over their bodies due to drinking of honeywine. Not even one was quietly seated there. Not even one was not intoxicated. Not only that, none were satisfied.
5::61::15::Beholding the destruction wrought by the vanaras to the garden, trees, leaves and flowers, and having drunk all the honey, Dadhimukha angrily asked them to stop and get out. 
5::61::16::The elderly Dadhimukha who was the powerful protector of the garden reprimanded them and devised yet again a plan to protect it.
5::61::17::He spoke harshly to some, to others he asked not to talk, some he slapped on the hind part with the palm of his hand. To some he spoke pleasantly and with some he quarrelled. And to others he spoke in a conciliatory manner.
5::61::18::In their drunkenness they were using abusive language and with their strength they retaliated without fear. They invaded without considering their mistakes. They caught hold of Dadhimukha and pulled him. 
5::61::19::In their drunkenness some monkeys scratched Dadhimukha violently with their nails, some bit him with their teeth and others slapped and kicked him with their palms and legs.Getting together they looted the garden completely.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे एकषष्टितम स्सर्गः।।Thus ends the sixtyfirst sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
