5::48::1::Thereafter the great demon king, mighty angry at the death of Aksha in the hands of Hanuman, controlled his feeling and ordered Indrajit who was like a godhead.
5::48::2::You are an expert in wielding astras (missiles) and foremost among the wielders of weapons. You are highly efficient. You have brought grief even to suras and asuras. You are a warrior of proven ability demonstrated in your war against the gods including Indra. By propitiating, (through penance), grandfather Brahma you have acquired many missiles.
5::48::3::None could face you in war including Indra, Maruts and gods because of your skill and the power of your astras.
5::48::4::Excepting you there is none who has not experienced fatigue in war in the three worlds. You alone are intelligent in fighting. You are protected by the strength of your arms and power of austerity. You are aware of the proper place and time of action.
5::48::5::Nothing is impossible for you in war. You do not consider with your wise judgment any action unfit for undertaking. There is none in all the three worlds who is unaware of the strength of your weapons and your power to recall through Mantra the weapon you have discharged.
5::48::6::The power of your penance, your valour and your ability to discharge astras in war is equal only to mine. I am not bothered about the consequences of war you wage because your victory is certain.
5::48::7::
5::48::8::Your dear young brother Aksha is killed. O scourage of enemies I do not have the faith in them as I have in you.
5::48::9::O intelligent warrior measure the  strength, power and valour of the monkey and  your own strength carefully. Exercise your own strength and speed accordingly.
5::48::10::O  warrior of extraordinary merit among the wielders of astras  asses your strength approach the enemy in a manner by which he is subdued without causing further destruction to our army. Carefully measure your own strength and your enemy's  before you start fighting. 
5::48::11::O hero take no large army as it is futile with this monkey endowed with extraordinary vigour. Even a thunderbolt can do nothing. He is like the wind and has no match in speed. He is like the sacrificial fire who cannot be destroyed by weapons.  
5::48::12::
5::48::13::I am reluctant to send you to war in the circumstances. But you are the best choice for me. However, certainly this is the duty of a kshatriya who follows the science of polity. Hence I am sending you.
5::48::14::O subduer of enemies you are capable of handling different kinds of weapons. Therefore, understand that I seek only your ultimate triumph in war.
5::48::15::Hearing the father's words (of exhortation), he, who is never distressed at the prospect of war decided to seek the battle as he was powerful like the son of Daksha, and went round his father with respect. 
5::48::16::Having been honoured by his own kith and kin who loved him, Indrajit rushed forth for war with martial vigour.
5::48::17::When the illustrious son of Ravana, the highly Indrajit resplendent with eyes of lotus petals marched ahead he looked like the turbulent ocean on a fullmoon day.
5::48::18::Like Indra, Indrajit ascended the chariot (which had the standard of Indra as it was seized from him as a token of his having conquered Indra) yoked to four sharptoothed tigers. It moved in swiftness vying with Garuda, the king of birds in speed.
5::48::19::Mounted on the chariot, Indrajit, the best in archery and an expert in weaponry went quickly to the place where that great Hanuman was stationed.
5::48::20::The leader of the monkey also became happier on hearing the rumbling (of the chariot) and the twang of Indrajit's bowstring.
5::48::21::Indrajit who was an adept in warfare, picked his highly powerful bow and aimed his sharpedged arrow at Hanuman.
5::48::22::When he sallied forth happily holding a bow full of passion for war, darkness prevailed in all quarters and it became gloomy. Beasts began to howl in various frightful ways.
5::48::23::(To see the combat) the Nagas, Yakshas, seers and Siddhas who move round the heavenly orbits assembled in the sky. The birds collected  in flocks in the sky and screeched loudly and happily.
5::48::24::Hanuman of very high speed enlarged his body and roared, perceiving Indrajit's chariot coming swiftly.
5::48::25::Indrajit on his part sat in his divine chariot holding a wonderful bow and in a lightning speed twanged it.
5::48::26::Then the son of the demon king and Hanuman, both very fast in speed, mighty and powerful, fearless in war and like sura and asura closed in upon each other.
5::48::27::Hanuman of immeasurable strength heaved himself to a huge proprtion and went moving on the path of his father (windgod) rendering useless the extraordinary speed of the arrows of Indrajit, who was great in chariot warfare, and an efficient archer. 
5::48::28::Then the heroic Indrajit, slayer of enemy warriors, discharged long arrows that were fixed with find feathers with sharppointed gold tips, bent a little at the tip touching the bow string, as swift as lightning. 
5::48::29::Thereupon, hearing the rumbling of the chariot, the sounds of mrudangas, bheris, and patahas drawing towards him, and percieving the loud twang of the bow (of Indrajit) Hanuman sprang up again.
5::48::30::The great tawny monkey moved quickly between spaces of arrows that were aimed at him rendering hosts of Indrajit's targets futile.
5::48::31::Hanuman, son of the Windgod again stood facing the arrows directly stretching his hands and jumped (into the air).
5::48::32::Both the warriors endowed with speed and skill in warfare carried on the fight which captivated the minds of all creatures.
5::48::33::The demon did not find a way to hit Hanuman. Maruti also found no opportunity to hit great Indrajit. Both of them being equal to gods in valour became too much to each other in war. (Both of them moved at meteoric speed making it difficult to aim at the enemy.)
5::48::34::Indrajit's infallible arrows missed Hanuman. Then the great warrior became perplexed and started thinking seriously within himself entering into a reflective mood.
5::48::35::Then Indrajit, son of the demon king, thinking that a vanara should not be killed started considering other means of catching hm.
5::48::36::Then the heroic master of weapons, an excellent and glorious warrior directed the  Brahmastram towards the foremost of monkeys.
5::48::37::Indrajit, the strongarmed hero, who knew the secrets of all missiles, realising that the son of the Windgod cannot be killed caught him by the divine weapon of Brahma (Brahmastram). 
5::48::38::Then Hanuman bound by the weapon of the demon was unable to move and fell on the ground.
5::48::39::The monkey leader realised that his speed was arrested by the power of the lord Brahma, by the strength of the bond of Brahmastram. He then recalled lord Brahma's boon to him.
5::48::40::Hanuman realised that it was by invoking creator Brahma and applying the mantra that he was caught by Brahmastram. On that occasion he started thinking of the boon given to him  by Grandsire Brahma :
5::48::41::'I deem it an effect of the power of Brahma. It is not possiblle for me to free myself due to the power of the great lord presiding over the universe through the astra. It should be obeyed'.
5::48::42::Reflecting within himself about the power of the astra, Hanuman recalled Braham's favour to him. He recalled his own power to liberate himself from the Brahmastra and resolved to abide by the order of Brahma.
5::48::43::'Even though I am bound by the astra, I have the protection of both Brahma and Indra as well as the Windgod. Hence there is no cause for apprension.
5::48::44::'If I am caught by the demon I will have the opportunity to see the demon lord. Therefore, let me be caught by my enemies'.
5::48::45::Hanuman, a destroyer of enemies, who assesses before he acts, resolved (to submit to the ordinance of Brahma), to be silent (the power of his movement affected). When the enemy forces came to him slowly and slowly, siezed him forcibly and abused him, he roared.
5::48::46::Then the ogres had Hanuman, the subduer of enemies, who made no effort to move, bound with hemp rope and bark robes.
5::48::47::Bound by the enemy warriors, Hanuman, decided to bear all humiliations, thinking, 'May be the demon king might come to see me out of curiosity if he is so disposed'.
5::48::48::On being bound by bark ropes Hanuman was set free from the bond of Brahmastra, since  the bondage of Brahmastra does not tolerate another ordinary bondage.  
5::48::49::Then the heroic Indrajit coming to know that the foremost of the monkeys bound by bark ropes was released from the bondage of Brahmastra, thought, 'indeed the divine weapon does not tolerate other bonds, so the vanara is released'.
5::48::50::
5::48::51::Though binding and dragging by the ogres had hurt Hanuman, he on his part did not know that he had been released from Brahmastra. 
5::48::52::The cruel ogres hit Hanuman with sticks and fists and dragged him to the presence of the demon lord.
5::48::53::Then Indarjit, seeing the powerful Hanuman, the foremost of monkeys who was released from the Brahmastra, still bound by bark ropes, presented him to the ogres and their master in the royal assembly.
5::48::54::The ogres presented the best of monkeys, Hanuman looking like an elephant in rut to Ravana, the demon king.
5::48::55::Who is he? Whose son is he? Why has he come here? Where has he come from? What business does he have here? Thus the heroic demons talked among themselves.
5::48::56::Thereafter other ogres angrily said 'Let us kill him, burn him or otherwise devour him,' thus they spoke to one another.
5::48::57::The great Hanuman moving quickly and crossing the path came near the feet of the king. He saw the aged and experienced ministers of the king and the palace of the king adorned with precious gems.  
5::48::58::Resplendent Ravana saw  the ogres of ugly appearance dragging the foremost of the monkeys here and there.
5::48::59::Hanuman the best of monkeys also saw the demon king who had both splendour and strength, radiating brilliance like the Sun.
5::48::60::That tenheaded rakshasa king, rolling his red eyes rapidly in rage and observing the monkey unwinkingly ordered the noble and aged ministers of his clan to interrogate Hanuman.   
5::48::61::At the very outset they questioned Hanuman manner in the usual about the place he came from and the purpose. Hanuman reported, 'I am Hanuman. I came as a messenger by the order of the king of monkeys'.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे अष्टचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortyeigth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
