5::16::1::हरिपुङ्गवः monkey leader (Hanuman), प्रशस्तव्याम् laudable lady, ताम् her, सीताम् Sita, प्रशस्य admired, गुणाभिरामम् embellished with virtues, रामं च and Rama, पुनः again, चिन्तापरः to lament, अभवत् began. 
5::16::2::तेजस्वी sagacious, सः he, हनुमान् Hanuman, मुहूर्तमिव for a short while, ध्यात्वा after thinking, बाष्पपर्याकुलेक्षणः eyes dimmed with tears, सीताम् Sita, आश्रित्य at the plight of, विललाप ह lamented. 
5::16::3::गुरुविनीतस्य welltrained, लक्ष्मणस्य Lakshmana's, मान्या worshipped, गुरुप्रिया loved by elders, सीतापि Sita too, दुःखार्ता यदि if she is also worried like this, कालः time, दुरतिक्रमः हि  difficult to transgress.
5::16::4::रामस्य Rama's, धीमतः prowess, लक्ष्मणस्य च and Lakshmana's, व्यवसायज्ञा might, देवी queen, जलदागमे by seeing the clouds, गङ्गेव like Ganga, अत्यर्थम् exceedingly, न क्षुभ्यते is not agitated.  
5::16::5::तुल्यशीलवयोवृत्ताम् perfect match in character, age and behaviour, तुल्याभिजनलक्षणाम् perfect match in in birth and auspicious marks, वैदेहीम् with Vaidehi, राघवः Raghva, अर्हति a right person, इयम् this lady, असितेक्षणा blackeyed one, तम् him, अर्हति deserves.
5::16::6::नवहेमाभाम् a lady shining like the fresh gold, श्रियमिव glory, लोककान्ताम् dear to the whole world, ताम् her, दृष्ट्वा on seeing, मनसा mentally, रामम् Rama, जगाम he reached, इदम् thise, वचनं च words, अब्रवीत् said. 
5::16::7::विशालाक्ष्याः largeeyed one, अस्याः हेतोः for her sake, महाबलः powerful, वाली Vali, हतः was killed, वीर्ये in heroism, रावणप्रतिमः comparable to Ravana, कबन्धश्च even Kabandha, निपातितः is killed. 
5::16::8::वने in the forest, सङ्ख्ये in a war, रामेण by Rama, विक्रम्य by advancing with valour, महेन्द्रेण by Indra, शम्बरः Sambara , इव like, भीमविक्रमः a hero of  fearsome valour, विराधः Viradha, हतः slayed. 
5::16::9::जनस्थाने at Janasthana, अग्निशिखोपमैः equal to flames of fire, शरैः with arrows, भीमकर्मणाम् warriors of fierce valour, रक्षसाम् of demons, चतुर्दश fourteen, सहस्राणि thousand, निहतानि were killed. 
5::16::10::विदितात्मना by one who knows the self, रामेण by Rama, सङ्ख्ये in a battle, खरश्च Khara, निहतः destroyed, त्रिशिराश्च and Trisira, निपातितः was killed, महातेजाः highly powerful, दूषणश्च Dooshana also. 
5::16::11::अस्याः निमित्ते on account of her, सुग्रीवः Sugriva, वालिपालितम् ruled by Vali, दुर्लभम् difficult to obtain, लोकसत्कृतम् retained supremacy in the world, वानराणाम् of vanaras, ऐश्वर्यम् prosperity, प्राप्तवान् obtained. 
5::16::12::विशालाक्ष्याः largeeyed lady, अस्याः हेतोः on her account, मया by me, नदनदीपतिः lord of rivers and rivulets, सागरश्च ocean also, क्रान्तः crossed, इयम् this, पुरी च and city, अवेक्षिता surveyed.  
5::16::13::रामः Rama, अस्याः कृते on account of her, समुद्रान्ताम् stretching to the ocean, मेदिनीम् land, जगच्चापि or even the whole world, परिवर्तयेद्यदि if he turns upside down, युक्तमित्येव that is justified only, मे to me, मतिः strikes my mind. 
5::16::14::त्रिषु in the three, लोकेषु in worlds, राज्यं वा or kingdom, जनकात्मजा Janaka's daughter, सीता वा for Sita, सकलम् everything, त्रैलोक्यराज्यम् all the three worlds, सीतायाः or Sita's, कलाम् one sixteenth part, नाप्नुयात् not equal. 
5::16::15::इयम् this lady, क्षेत्रे in the field, हलमुखक्षते tilled by plough, पद्मरेणुनिभैः resembling the pollen dust of lotus, शुभैः by the auspicious, केदारपाम्सुभिः with dust particles of paddy, कीर्णा covered, मेदिनीम् land, भित्त्वा breaking, उत्थिता risen up, धर्मशीलस्य  of the righteous, महात्मनः  great self, मैथिलस्य of Mithila, जनकराजस्य king Janaka's, सुता daughter, भर्तृदृढव्रता a lady of unswerving devotion to her husband, सा that, सीता Sita. 
5::16::16::विक्रान्तस्य of the valiant, आर्यशीलस्य of a man of noble conduct, संयुगेषु in battles, अनिवर्तिनः of a person who never returned, राज्ञः king's, दशरथस्य Dasaratha's, यशश्विनी celebrated lady, ज्येष्ठा eldest, स्नुषा daughterin law, एषा she is.
5::16::17::धर्मज्ञस्य who is righteous, कृतज्ञस्य of the grateful, विदितात्मनः of one armed with selfknowledge, रामस्य Rama's, दयिता dear, भार्या wife, इयम् she is, राक्षसीवशम् under the control of the demonesses, आगता has fallen. 
5::16::18::या she who, सर्वान् all kinds, भोगान् luxuries, परित्यज्य given up, भर्तृस्नेहबलात्कृता inspired by immense love towards her husband, दुःखानि sorrows, अचिन्तयित्वा not caring for, निर्जनम् desolate, वनम् woods, प्रविष्टा  entered, फलमूलेन by fruits and roots, संतुष्टा contented, भर्तृशुश्रूषणे by serving her husband, रता engaged, वनेऽऽपि even in the woods, भवने यथा as if she lived in the palace, पराम् supreme, प्रीतिम् happiness, भजते she experiences, कनकवर्णाङ्गी a lady of golden complexion, अनर्थानाम् of calamities, अभागिनी a lady who had not experienced earlier, सा इयम् this lady, एताम् such, यातनाम् torture, सहते tolerating. 
5::16::19::राघवः Raghava, शीलसम्पन्नाम् a highly virtuous lady, रावणेन by Ravana, प्रमथिताम् tormented, इमाम् her, पिपासितः a thirsty man, प्रपामिव like the source of water, द्रष्टुम् to see, अर्हति he deserves. 
5::16::20::राघवः Raghava, पुनः again, अस्याः her, लाभात् by finding her, राज्यपरिभ्रष्टः exiled from the kingdom, राजा king, मेदिनीम् land, पुनः again, प्राप्येव as if gained back, नूनम् surely, प्रीतिम् happiness, एष्यति he will get.
5::16::21::कामभोगैः with sensual pleasures, परित्यक्ता deprived, बन्धुजनेन च and also with relatives, हीना she is separated, तत्समागमकाङ्क्षिणी one who is eagerly waiting to meet them, देहम् body, धारयति she is holding. 
5::16::22::एषा this lady, राक्षस्यः at the shedemons, न पश्यति she is not looking, इमान् these, पुष्पफलद्रुमान् trees full of flowers and fruits, न not seeing, एकस्थहृदया with singleminded attention, राममेव only Rama, अनुपश्यति thinking, नूनम् surely. 
5::16::23::भर्ता नाम husband, indeed, नार्याः for a lady, भूषणादपि more than ornaments, परम् supreme, भूषणम् ornament, भूषणार्हा who though deserve ornaments, एषा तु she on her part, तेन with him, रहिता separated, न शोभते does not look nice 
5::16::24::रामः Rama, अनया with her, हीनः separated, आत्मनः his own, देहम् body, धारयति इति यत्  sustains like, दुःखेन with sorrow, नावसीदति इति यत् that he is not despondent, प्रभुः lord, दुष्करम् difficult task, कुरुते performs.  
5::16::25::असितकेशान्ताम् one who has dark hair, शतपत्रनिभेक्षणाम् endowed with eyes resembling a hundredpetalled lotus, सुखार्हाम् she deserves to be happy, इमाम् her, दुःखिताम् sorrowful lady, दृष्ट्वा on seeing, मम my, मनः अपि mind also, व्यथितम् is worried. 
5::16::26::क्षितिक्षमा tolerant like the earth, पुष्करसन्निभाक्षी lotuseyed lady, या she who, राघवलक्ष्मणाभ्याम् both by Raghava and Lakshmana, रक्षिता was protected, सा that lady, विकृतेक्षणाभिः by women who have hideous appearance, राक्षसीभिः by ogresses, सम्प्रति presently, वृक्षमूले under a tree, संरक्ष्यते she is guarded.
5::16::27::हिमहतनलिनीव like the lotus afflicted by snow, नष्टशोभा devoid of charm, व्यसनपरम्परया by continuous experience of sorrow, निपीड्यमाना afflicted, जनकसुता daughter of Janaka, सहचर रहिता away from her companion, चक्रवाकीव like the female Chakravaka, कृपणाम् pitiable, दशाम् state, प्रपन्ना has landed.
5::16::28::पुष्पावनताग्रशाखाः with topmost branches bent down by the heaviness of blossoms, अशोकाः Ashoka trees, अस्याः her, दृढम् firmly, शोकम् sorrow, जनयन्ति are creating, हिमव्यपायेन by the onset of spring, अभ्युत्थितः risen, नैकसहस्ररश्मि: thousandrayed (Sun), शीतरश्मि: च the Moon. 
5::16::29::बली strong, हरीणाम् of monkeys, ऋषभः bull, तरस्वी swiftfooted, कपिः monkey, इत्येवम् in this way, अर्थम् his object, अन्ववेक्ष्य after considering, इयम् this, सीता is Sita, इत्येव thus only, निविष्टबुद्धि: reflecting in his mind, तस्मिन् on that, वृक्षे tree, संश्रित्य taken refuge, निषसाद sat.
