5::42::1::The residents of Lanka panicked at the shrieking sounds of birds and cracking sounds of trees.
5::42::2::The frightened beasts and birds ran and flew, screeching in all directions. Fierce portents appeared to the demons.
5::42::3::Hideouslooking ogresses, awakened from sleep, saw the garden devastated by the heroic Vanara.
5::42::4::When the powerful, mighty and strongarmed Hanuman saw the ogresses he assumed a very huge form in order to strike terror in them.
5::42::5::Then, seeing the huge body of the mighty vanara resembling a mountain the ogresses questioned Janaki about him.
5::42::6::Who is he? By whom has he been sent? From where and why did he come here? What dialogue  did you have with him?
5::42::7::O lovely, largeeyed lady O auspicious one have no fear. What conversation did he have with you? Tell us.
5::42::8::Chaste and beautiful Sita said, How do I know about the ogresses who assume many fierce forms?
5::42::9::You alone can know about who he is and what he is about. A serpent alone knows the movement (footprints) of another serpent. There is no doubt about it.
5::42::10::I am also scared of him. I do not know who he is. I think he is a demon, who came here assuming a form of his choice.
5::42::11::LIstening to Vaidehi's words the ogresses divided themselves and fled in all directions. While some stood there, others went to report to Ravana.
5::42::12::The uglyfaced ogresses went to the presence of Ravana and reported about the frightening form of the vanara.
5::42::13::Your majesty an extremely powerful and frightening Vanara had a dialogue with Sita. He is stationed in the midst of Ashoka garden.
5::42::14::The deereyed Sita is not willing to disclose to us his identity even when we questioned her.
5::42::15::He may be an envoy of Indra or Kubera or of Rama sent with an intent to trace Sita.
5::42::16::Your beautiful pleasure garden filled with a variety of beasts has been ruined by this wonderful figure.
5::42::17::There is not a single place that has not been ruined by him there. Only the place where Janaka's daughter, Sita is resting has not been touched. 
5::42::18::It is not clear whether he spared that place for protecting Janakai or he stopped due to exhaustion. What is fatigue for him? It must be to save her that she is spared by him.
5::42::19::He has spared the simsupa tree with lovely, tender leaves and flowers which is a chosen  resort by Sita.
5::42::20::Your highness should take severe action on that person of fierce appearance with whom Sita dared to speak, and by whom the garden is ruined.
5::42::21::O lord of the demon clan Who dares to talk to Sita if he has not given up all hope of life, since she is desired by you.
5::42::22::On listening to the report of the ogresses, Ravana, the lord of demons flared up like blazing flame of a sacrificial fire, his eyeballs rolling in rage. 
5::42::23::From his angry eyes fell down drops of tears just as burning drops of oil drip from two burning lamps. 
5::42::24::Then powerful Ravana commanded heroic demons called kinkaras who vied in strength to catch Hanuman. 
5::42::25::Eighty thousand powerful  kinkaras (a clan of demons), largebellied, with large teeth and of dreadful appearance, swift in action, armed with hammers and clubs marched from there, resolved to capture Hanuman. 
5::42::26::The kinkaras rushed towards the leader of vanaras who stood near the archway like the moths rushing towards the flame.
5::42::27::They assailed Hanuman with iron maces, crowbars edged with gold and shining arrows resembling the Sun.
5::42::28::They quickly surrounded Hanuman and stood with hammers, sharpedged spears, tridents, barbed missiles and powerful javelins. 
5::42::29::Gigantic Hanuman, illustrious and brilliant, roared and waved his tail striking it with force on the ground causing loud sound.
5::42::30::Hanuman, son of Maruti, enlarged his body to a huge size and patted himself wildly  making loud noise that echoed the entire Lanka.
5::42::31::By the highly frightening sound caused by Hanuman patting, the birds from the sky fell down making a loud noise and Hanuman proclaimed in a loud voice as follows: 
5::42::32::Victory to Rama, the mighty and powerful, Victory to Lakshmana. Victory to king Sugriva who is ruled by Rama.
5::42::33::I, son of the Windgod, destroyer of hostile armies, am a servant of Rama, the lord of Kosala kingdom, a man of unwearied action.
5::42::34::Even a thousand Ravanas will not match me in strength when I pound stones and trees in a thousand ways.
5::42::35::I shall destroy the city of Lanka and pay my respects to Mythili right under the nose of all demons. I will return with my purpose accomplished. 
5::42::36::Terrified on hearing the roar, the kinkaras looked at the towering Hanuman who seemed like a cloud in twilight (red in colour). 
5::42::37::Obeying their king's commnad, putting aside their fear, the kinkaras freely attacked the vanara  from all directions with dreadful weapons.
5::42::38::Extremely powerful Hanuman surrounded by heroes all over, on his part went to the archway and picked up a terrific iron beam.
5::42::39::Hanuman, the mighty hero, seized the iron beam and struck the kinkaras, just as Garuda, the son of Vinata shoots up a struggling serpent and starts taking strides in the sky with the weapon in his hand (like Indra with his thunderbolt did with demons).
5::42::40::The great Windgod's son killed the kinkaras, and returned to the archway desiring further combat.
5::42::41::Then a few surviving ogres took to their heels after getting over that shock and reported to Ravana of the destruction of the kinkaras in the combat
5::42::42::The mighty demon king having heard about the killing of the formidable army of ogres, his eyes rolling in rage, commanded the son of Prahasta, who is difficult to conquer and matchless in war.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे द्विचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः।।Thus ends the fortysecond sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
