5::22::1::राक्षसाधिपः lord of demons, परुषम् sharp, सीतायाः of Sita, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा on hearing, ततः then, प्रियदर्शनम् is pleasing to see, विप्रियम् unpleasant, सीताम् to Sita, प्रत्युवाच replied.  
5::22::2::स्त्रीणाम् among women, यथा यथा more and more, सान्त्वयिता is courteous, तथा तथा so much so, वश्यः a passionate one, यथा यथा more and more, प्रियम् dear, वक्ता speaks, तथा तथा so much, परिभूतः will be humiliated. 
5::22::3::त्वयि in you, समुत्थितः arisen, कामः passion, सुसारथिः good charioteer, अमार्गम् wrong path, आसाद्य taking, द्रवतः speeding, हयानिव like the horses, मे my, क्रोधम् anger, सन्नियच्छति restrained. 
5::22::4::मनुष्याणाम् in men, कामः passion, वामः partial, यस्मिन् in whom, जने people, निबध्यते bound, तस्मिन् in him, अनुक्रोशः compassion, स्नेहश्च friendship, जायते किल even though punishable. 
5::22::5::वरानने O beautiful lady, एतस्मात् on this, कारणात् account, वधार्हाम् deserve to be killed, अवमानार्हाम् deserves to be put to shame, मिथ्याप्रव्रजिते in a pseudoascetic life, रताम् engaged, त्वाम् you, न घातयामि will not kill. 
5::22::6::मैथिलि Mythili, इह here, माम् me, यानि यानि whatever, परुषाणि piercing, वाक्यानि statements, ब्रवीषि spoke, तेषु तेषु for each one, तव your, दारुणः dreadful, वध killing, युक्तः is right. 
5::22::7::राक्षसाधिपः lord of demons, रावणः Ravana, वैदेहीम् to Vaidehi, एवम् in that way, उक्त्वा having spoken, क्रोधसंरम्भसंयुक्तः stirred up with anger and exitement, सीताम् to Sita, उत्तरम् in reply, अब्रवीत् said. 
5::22::8::मया by me, ते to you, यः that, अवधिः deadline, कृत: fixed, द्वौ two, मासौ months, मे to me, रक्षितव्यौ keep, वरवर्णिनि of beautiful hue, ततः thereafter, मम my, शयनम् bed, आरोह come to share.  
5::22::9::द्वाभ्याम् those two, मासाभ्याम् two months, ऊर्ध्वम् after that, माम् me, भर्तारम् as husband, अनिच्छतीम् reluctant, त्वाम् you, मम my, प्रातराशार्थम् for breakfast, महानसे to the kitchen, आलभन्ते cook you. 
5::22::10::राक्षसेन्द्रेण by the demon king, तर्ज्यमानाम् threatened, तां जानकीम् that Janaki, सम्प्रेक्ष्य observing, ताः those, देवगन्धर्वकन्याः daughters of gods and gandharvas, विकृतेक्षणाः distressed eyes, विषेदुः wept sadly. 
5::22::11::तेन by that, रक्षसा demon, तर्जिताम् threatened, ताम् her, सीताम् Sita, अपराः some of them, ओष्ठप्रकारैः with movement of lips, तथा likewise, अपराः still others, वक्त्रनेत्रैः with movement of eyes and faces, आश्वासयामासुः consoled her.  
5::22::12::ताभिः by them (the women), आश्वासिता having been consoled, सीता Sita, वृत्तशौण्डीर्यगर्वितम् proud of the power of her virtues, आत्महितम् in selfdefence, वाक्यम् words, राक्षसाधिपम् to the demon king, रावणम् to Ravana, उवाच said. 
5::22::13::यः whoever, त्वाम् you, विगर्हितात् reproached, अस्मात् from this, कर्मणः action, निवारयति prevents, ते your, निःश्रेयसे who is interested in your welfare, रतः remain, जनः people, कश्चित् some, नास्ति destroyed, नूनम् surely. 
5::22::14::शचीपतेः Sachi's husband, Indra, शचीमिव like Sachi, धर्मात्मनः righteous self (Rama), पत्नीम् wife, माम् me, त्रिषु लोकेषु in the three worlds, त्वदन्यः none, कः what, मनसापि even in mind, प्रार्थयेत् would seek. 
5::22::15::राक्षसाधम stupid demon, अमिततेजसः of undimmed brilliance, रामस्य Rama's, भार्याम् wife, यत् such, पापम् sin, उक्तवान् spoke, असि you are, तस्य its, क्व where, गतः gone, मोक्ष्यसे will you escape.
5::22::16::युधि in war, सद्दृश: similar, दृप्तः arrogant, मातङ्ग: elephant, शश:च and a rabbit, यथा as, तथा in the same way, नीच: mean, रामः Rama, मातङ्गवद्राम: like the proud elephant, त्वम् you, शशवत् rabbit, स्मृतः as spoken by people.
5::22::17::सः such, त्वम् you, इह here, इक्ष्वाकुनाथम् king of the Ikshvakus, क्षिपन् looking down, न लज्जसे you are not ashamed, तस्य this, चक्षुषोर्विषयं within his sight, तावत् until then, न उपगच्छसि  not yet caught  
5::22::18::अनार्य ignoble wretch, माम् me, निरीक्षतः while looking at, ते your, क्रूरे cruel, विरूपे uncouth, कृष्णपिङ्गले dark brown colour, इमे these, नयने two eyes, क्षितौ on the ground, कस्मात् why, न पतिते not dropping down? 
5::22::19::धर्मात्मनः righteous, तस्य his, पत्नीम् wife, दशरथस्य Dasaratha's, स्नुषां च daughterinlaw also, माम् me, व्याहरतः while you speak, ते you, जिह्वा tongue, कथम् how is it, न व्यवशीर्यते not snap and fall down on the ground? 
5::22::20::भस्मार्ह  fit to be reduced to ashes, दशग्रीव O tennecked one, रामस्य Rama's, असन्देशात्  not received permission, तपसः penance, अनुपालनात् due to observing, तेजसा with my power, त्वाम् you, भस्म ashes, न कुर्मि I am not making. 
5::22::21::धीमतः of a wise one, रामस्य Rama's, अहम् I am, त्वया by you, अपहर्तुम् to abduct, न शक्या it is not possible, तव your, वधार्थाय for your ruin, विधिः providence, विहितः ordained, अत्र here, संशयः doubt, न no. 
5::22::22::शूरेण by a warrior, धनदभ्रात्रा by brother of Kubera, बलैः with forces, समुदितेन च endowed with, त्वया you, रामम् Rama, अपोह्य bypassing him, कस्मात् for what reason, दारचौर्यम् stealing of other's wife, कृतम् is committed. 
5::22::23::राक्षसाधिपः lord of demons, रावणः Ravana, सीतायाः Sita's, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा on hearing, क्रूरे cruel ones, नयने eyes, विवृत्य turning them dreadfully, जानकीम् at Janaki, अन्ववैक्षत looked at. 
5::22::24::नीलजीमूतसङ्काशः looked like a mass of dark cloud, महाभुजशिरोधरः who had strong arms and neck, सिंहसत्त्वगतिः gait like a lion, श्रीमान् prosperous, दीप्तजिह्वाग्रलोचनः with blazing eyes and tongue. 
5::22::25::चलाग्रमकुटप्रांशुः tall with unsteady crown, चित्रमाल्यानुलेपनः with wonderful garlands and smeared with unguents, रक्तमाल्याम्बरधरः adorned with red flower garlands and clothes, तत्सङ्गदविभूषणः wearing shining ornamental armlets. 
5::22::26::अमृतोत्पादनद्धेन waist band tied at the time of churning the milkocean for nectar, भुजगेन like serpent, मन्दरः इव like Mandara mountain, महता with huge, मेचकेन a dark coloured, श्रोणिसूत्रेण by a thread around his hips, सुसंवृतः wellwrapped. 
5::22::27::अचलसङ्काशः looked like a mountain, राक्षसेश्वरः lord of demons, परिपूर्णाभ्याम् with full, ताभ्याम् both of them, भुजाभ्याम् with two arms, शृङ्गाभ्याम् with two peaks, मन्दरः इव like the Mandara, सः he, शुशुभे shone. 
5::22::28::तरुणादित्यवर्णाभ्याम् of the colour of the rising Sun, कुण्डलाभ्याम् with earrings, विभूषितः adorned, रक्तपल्लवपुष्पाभ्याम् having red leaves and flowers, अशोकाभ्याम् with two Ashoka trees, अचलः इव like a mountain. 
5::22::29::कल्पवृक्षप्रतिमः resembling the wishyielding tree in heaven, सः he, मूर्तिमान् a personification, वसन्तः इव like the spring season, श्मशानचैत्यप्रतिमः resembled a memorial structure built on the cremation ground, भूषितोऽपि though adorned with jewels, भयङ्करः fierceful appearance.  
5::22::30::कोपसंरक्तलोचनः eyes red with anger, रावणः Ravana, वैदेहीम् Vaidehi, अवेक्षमाणः looking at, भुजङ्गः इव like a serpent, निःश्वसन् breathing heavily, सीताम् to Sita, उवाच said. 
5::22::31::अनयेन with a wrong policy, अभिसम्पन्नम् endowed, अर्थहीनम् meaningless, अनुव्रते a lady following a vow of chastity, अद्य now, अहम् I, त्वाम् you, सूर्यः Sun, ओजसा with his bright light, सन्ध्यामिव like the morning twilight, नाशयामि dispel. 
5::22::32::राजा king, शत्रुरावणः who torments enemies with his terrific voice, रावणः Ravana, मैथिलीम् to Mythili, इति thus, उक्त्वा having spoken, ततः then, घोरदर्शनाः women of fierceful looks, सर्वाः all, राक्षसीः shedemons, सन्दिदेश commanded. 
5::22::33::एकाक्षीम् oneeyed, एककर्णां च with one year, तथा similarly, कर्णप्रावरणाम् whose ear was covered, गोकर्णीम् who had cow's ears, हस्तिकर्णीं च  who had ears like those of an elephant, लम्बकर्णीम् one who had long ears, अकर्णिकाम् who had no ears, हस्तिपाद्यश्वपाद्यौ च one with the feet of an elephant and another with the hoofs of the horse, गोपादीम् with cow's hoof, पादचूलिकाम् one with hair on feet, एकाक्षीम् oneeyed one, एकपादीं च with one foot, पृथुपादीम् one with broad feet, अपादिकाम्  who had no feet, अतिमात्राशिरोग्रीवाम् with a huge neck and head, अतिमात्राकुचोदरीम् of large breasts and belly, अतिमात्रास्यनेत्रां च  with big face and eyes, दीर्घजिह्वाम् with long tongue, अजिह्विकाम् with no tongue, अनासिकाम्  noseless, सिंहमुखीम् with a lion face, गोमुखीम् with the face of a cow, सूकरीमुखीम् a boar faced ogress.
5::22::34::राक्षस्यः O rakshasa women, जानकी Janaki, सीता Sita, क्षिप्रम् quickly, यथा in a manner, मद्वशगा submits to me, भवति you do, तथा in that way, सर्वाः all of you, क्षिप्रम् at once, समेत्य च jointly, कुरुत you may try.
5::22::35::प्रतिलोमानुलोमैश्च adopting means favourable or contrary to her will, सामदानादिभेदनैः by  gentle or conciliatory, deceptive or coercive means, दण्डस्य or punishment, उद्यमनेन च by adopting, वैदेहीम् Vaidehi, आवर्जयत attract her attention towards me. 
5::22::36::राक्षसेन्द्रः demon king, पुनः पुनः again and again, इति thus, प्रतिसमादिश्य repeated his instruction, काममन्युपरीतात्मा burning with passion and anger, जानकीम् Janaki, पर्यतर्जयत् threatened by pointing his finger at her
5::22::37::ततः then, धान्यमालिनी Dhanyamalini, राक्षसी shedemon, शीघ्रम् quickly, उपगम्य having approached, दशग्रीवम् tennecked Ravana, परिष्वज्य having embraced, इदम् this, वचनम् word, अब्रवीत् spoke. 
5::22::38::महाराज O king, मया with me, क्रीड you may sport, राक्षसेश्वर lord of demons, विवर्णया pale, कृपणया with a wretched, मानुष्या with human, अनया with her, सीतया with Sita, तव to you, किम् what for. 
5::22::39::महाराज O king, अमरश्रेष्ठ: foremost of the immortals, तव your, बाहुबलार्जितान् earned by the strength of your arms, दिव्यान् divine, भोगसत्तमान् luxuries, अस्याः by her, न विदधाति not given , नूनम् surely 
5::22::40::अकामाम् a woman devoid of desire, कामयानस्य of a man who desires, शरीरम् body, उपतप्यते only is tormented, इच्छन्तीम् a lady who desires, कामयानस्य one who is desiring, शोभना is enjoyable, प्रीतिः pleasure भवति becomes
5::22::41::राक्षस्या by the demon, एवम् in that way, उक्तः having been addressed, बली powerful, मेघसङ्काशः appearing like a cloud, सः he, राक्षसः demon, ततः then, समुत्क्षिप्तः turned away, प्रहसन् laughing heartily, न्यवर्तत went back. 
5::22::42::सः he, दशग्रीवः tennecked, मेदिनीम् the ground, कम्पयन्निव as if shaking, प्रस्थितः departed, ज्वलद्भास्करवर्णाभम् blazing like the glow of the midday sun, निवेशनम् residence, प्रविवेश entered. 
5::22::43::देवगन्धर्वकन्याश्च daughters of gods and gandharvas, नागकन्याश्च and daughters of nagas, सर्वतः from all over, दशग्रीवम् Ravana, परिवार्य having sorrounded, तम् him, गृहोत्तमम् excellent home, विविशुः entered. 
5::22::44::सः he, रावणः Ravana, धर्मपराम् woman treading the righteous path, अवस्थिताम् steadfast, प्रवेपमानाम् trembling in fear, मैथिलीम् Mythili, परिभर्त्स्य having abused, सीताम् Sita, विहाय leaving, मदनेन मोहितः overpowered with passion, भास्वरम् glittering, स्वम् his, वेश्मैव dwelling, प्रविवेश entered. 
