5::41::1::गमिष्यन् to depart, सः वानरः that vanara, तया by her, प्रशस्ताभिः with choicest, वाग्भिः with words, पूजितः honoured, तस्मात् from that, देशात् from location, अपक्रम्य moved, चिन्तयामास started thinking. 
5::41::2::इदं कार्यम् this work, अल्पशेषम् little more remains, इयम् this, असितेक्षणा blackeyed lady, दृष्टा seen, त्रीन् three expedientsnegotiation, presentation and, dissension (Sama, Dana, Bheda), उपायान् strategies, अतिक्रम्य crossing, इह here, चतुर्थ fourth (expedient) punishment (Danda), विद्यते remains.  
5::41::3::रक्षस्सु with demons, साम negotiation, गुणाय for any merit, न कल्पते does not lead, अर्थोपचितेषु being wealthy, दानम् gifts, न युज्यते not proper, बलदर्पिताः proud of their strength, जनाः people, भेदसाध्याः will not yield by sowing seeds of dissension, न not, इह here, मम my, पराक्रमस्त्वेव only by valour, रोचते  pleases me.  
5::41::4::इह here, अस्य of this, कार्यस्य of the task, पराक्रमात् ऋते other than power, विनिश्चयः a decision, कश्चित् even one, इह here, न उपपद्यते not hold good, यत् that, रणे in fight, हतप्रवीराः slay a few heroes, राक्षसाः ogres, अद्य to day, इह here, कथञ्चित् somehow, मार्दवम् soften, ईयुः will yield. 
5::41::5::कार्ये in a work to be accomplished, कर्मणि in a work, निर्दिष्टे when the work is entrusted, यः he who, पूर्वकार्याविरोधेन without affecting the earlier work, बहून्यपि many, साधयेत् will achieve, सः he, कार्यम् task, कर्तुम् to do, अर्हति is fit. 
5::41::6::इह here, स्वल्पस्य of a trivial task, अपि also, कर्मणः of the task, साधकः effective, हेतुः cause, एकः one, न हि is not, यः he who, अर्थम् as an object, बहुधा in many ways (means of doing), वेद knows, सः he, अर्थसाधने in achieving the task, समर्थः capable. 
5::41::7::अहम् I, इहैव here itself, तावत् therefore, परात्मसम्मर्दविशेषतत्त्ववित् by understanding the difference between the strength of enemy forces and our strength in war, प्लवगेश्वरालयम् abode of vanaras, व्रजेयं यदि if I go, ततः then, मम my, भर्तृशासनम् the orders of my lord, कृतम् executed, स्यात् well. 
5::41::8::अद्य today, मम for me, राक्षसैः सह with ogres, प्रसह्य enduring, युद्धम् war, कथं नु how to, सुखागतम् happy coming, भवेत् may be, तथैव in that way, आत्मबलं च our strength, सारवत् substantial, सः he, दशाननः च tenheaded Ravana's, माम् me, रणे in fight, मानयेत्  measure. 
5::41::9::ततः thereafter, समन्त्रिवर्गम् along with the ministers, सबलप्रयायिनम् and army chiefs marching forward, दशाननम् tenheaded Ravana, रणे in war, समासाद्य after finding out, तस्य his, हृदि in his mind, स्थितम् established, मतम् feeling, बलं च वै strength, मत्त्वा knowing, अहम् I, इतः from here, सुखेन happily, पुनः again, व्रजे can go. 
5::41::10::नृशंसस्य wicked Ravana's, अस्य his, इदम् this (Ashoka garden), नेत्रमनःकान्तम् feast to the eyes and mind, नानाद्रुमलतायुतम् filled with different kinds of trees and creepers, उत्तमम् excellent, वनम् garden, नन्दनोपमम् like the Nandana garden of Indra. 
5::41::11::शुष्कम् dried up, वनम् forest, अनलः इव like fire, इदम् this, विध्वंसयिष्यामि will destroy, अस्मिन् when this, भग्ने devastate, ततः then, दशाननः Ravana, कोपम्  anger, करिष्यति will exhibit. 
5::41::12::ततः then, राक्षसाधिपः king of ogres, साश्वमहारथद्विपम् with horses, chariots and elephants, महत् great, त्रिशूलकालायसपट्टिसायुधम् armed with tridents, black iron spears, बलम् army, समादेक्ष्यति will order, ततः then, इदम् this, महत् great, युद्धम् war, भविष्यति will take place. 
5::41::13::अहं तु I on my part, चण्डविक्रमैः with those endowed with fierce strength, तैः with them, रक्षोभिः by demons, संयति in fight, समेत्य colliding, असह्यविक्रमः irresistible valour, रावणचोदितम् sent by Ravana, तत् that, बलम् army, निहत्य after destroying, सुखम् happily, कपीश्वरालयम् to the abode of vanaras, गमिष्यामि I will go. 
5::41::14::ततः then, भीमविक्रमः a vanara of fierce valour, मारुतिः Maruti, क्रुद्धः furious one, अथ and then, महता with great, ऊरुवेगेन with speed sprung from his thighs, मारुतवत् like the Windgod, द्रुमान् trees, क्षेप्तुम् to uproot, आरभत् started. 
5::41::15::ततः then, वीरः hero, हनुमान् Hanuman, मत्तद्विजसमाघुष्टम् filled with intoxicated birds, नानाद्रुमलतायुतम् with variety of trees and vines, प्रमदावनम् garden grown for women folk, बभञ्ज felled. 
5::41::16::तत् वनम् that garden, मथितैः with destroyed, वृक्षैः trees, भिन्नैः with breached, सलिलाशयैः ponds, चूर्णितैः powdered, पर्वताग्रैश्च mountain peaks, अप्रियदर्शनम् unpleasant appearance, बभूव remained. 
5::41::17::कलान्तद्रुमलतायुतम् with wilted vines and trees, तत् वनम् that garden, नानाशकुन्तविरुतैः with birds shrieking with different kinds of sounds, प्रभिन्नैः with smashed, सलिलाशयैः with ponds of water, क्लान्तै: withered, ताम्रैः with red ones only, किसलयैः with tender shoots, दावानलहतंरणाः like burntin forest fire, ताः लताः those climbers, विह्वलाः इव like women with their robes disarrayed, रेजुः trembling in fear. 
5::41::18::महत् great, तत् वनम् that garden, नाशितैः ruined, लतागृहैः arbours, चित्रगृहैः picture galleries, निर्धुतैः destroyed, महोरगैः huge serpents, व्यालमृगैश्च and even with wild animals, तथा in the same manner, उन्मथितैः scattered, शिलागृहैः stone houses, गृहैः with houses, प्रणष्टरूपम् disfigured, अभूत् became. 
5::41::19::दशास्यप्रमदावनस्य of that pleasure garden of the tenheaded Ravana, प्रमदावनस्य कपेः with the strength of the monkey who had set out to protect a lady (Sita), सा वनस्थली that garden, बलात् by force, विह्वला destroyed, शोकलताप्रताना was spreading out creepers of sorrow, जाता appeared. 
5::41::20::सः महाकपिः that great vanara, महात्मनः of the great self, तस्य his, अर्थपतेः of the lord of wealth, मनसः in mind, महत् great, व्यलीकम् unpleasantness, कृत्वा having caused, महाबलैः mighty, बहुभिः many, एकः singlehanded, युयुत्सुः ready to fight, श्रिया blazing, ज्वलन् glowing, तोरणम् exit doorway, आस्थितः stood. 
