5::9::1::The son of the Windgod, Hanuman, saw a huge, spacious and excellent of all mansions in the centre of the palace. 
5::9::2::The mansion of the lord of demons was a conglomeration of palaces half a yojana long and half a yojana wide. 
5::9::3::Hanuman, the subduer of enemies, went  around in search of  the largeeyed Vaidehi. 
5::9::4::Searching the excellent residences of important demons, Hanuman finally reached  the palace of the lord of ogres guarded by armed demons with elephants with two or three or four tusks.
5::9::5::Hanuman entered the palace of Ravana crowded with shedemons who were the wives of Ravana and the princesses brought by him after winning them in wars. To Hanuman, it looked like an ocean filled with crocodiles, sharks, whales, and a variety of fishes and snakes tossed by the force of the wind.
5::9::6::Whatever wealth was possessed by Vaisravana (Kubera, the son of sage Vishrava) and also Indra who rides the Ucchaisrava green horse, was there in the palace of Ravana.
5::9::7::The wealth stored in Ravana's palace was akin to what lay in the palaces of Kubera, Yama or Varuna, and ever more exquisite.
5::9::8::Hanuman saw in the centre of that palace a complex of many wellbuilt houses.
5::9::9::There was a wonderful aerial chariot called Pushpaka embellished with all kinds of gems built by Visvakarma for Brahma. It was the same one that Kubera had won from his grandfather, the creator Brahma, through his supreme penance. The lord of ogres acquired it (as a memento for his victory) by defeating Kubera with his might.
5::9::10::It was supported by finely built pillars of two types of gold (Kartaswara and Hiranmaya) with images of wolves carved on them and blazing. It was tall as if scraping the sky and resembled mountains like Meru and Mandara. It was graced with multitudes of  auspicious and decorated pleasurehouses everywhere. 
5::9::11::It was well built by Visvakarma and and had golden stairways, with radiant platforms glowing like fire and Sun. 
5::9::12::It had latticed windows made of gold inlaid with crystals. The platforms were encrusted with saphires called Indraneela and Mahaneela appropriately. 
5::9::13::It was shining bright with colourful corals, precious gems and peerless pearls fixed on its floor.
5::9::14::It was bright like molten gold, fragrant with red sandal comparable to the rising Sun.
5::9::15::Hanuman ascended the wonderful Pushpaka, welldecked with many corridors.
5::9::16::There he smelt the stupefying, unearthly odour of food and drink. He felt as though the fragrance had taken a potentially solid form.(Note: The wind has no form. But when he carried the aroma of food and drink it appeared like the personification of wind which could be smelt. गन्धवती पृथवी fragrance comes from earth पृथवीतत्त्व the poet transmits the same to the wind who has got only स्पर्श sense of touch).
5::9::17::The fragrance was as if inviting the mighty hero like a relative inviting his kith and kin, saying 'come here' and leading him to a place where Ravana rested.
5::9::18::Then he proceeded to an auspicious hall, which was Ravana's favourite like his chief queen dear to his heart. 
5::9::19::The stairways of the mansion were inlaid with special gems, windows were latticed with gold, floors were covered with crystals, figures of ivory with silver.
5::9::20::It was decorated with pillars of silver and gold inlaid with pearls and corals and gems. 
5::9::21::It had highly ornamented pillars all over, some slightly bent and others straight. With lofty columns looking like wings it appeared as if the mansion had started on its journey to heaven.
5::9::22::The floor was covered with a wide carpet spread from wall to wall with designs of different murals of many places and houses drawn in a row (garland like). The big carpet appeared like the expanse of earth itself.
5::9::23::The mansion was resounding with the noise of birds singing in heat. It had wonderful fragrance. It was laid with exquisite tapestries and served as a dwelling place for the king of demons.
5::9::24::It was smoky with fumes of agaru incence though spotless like a swan. It was colourful and radiant like Kamadhenu, the wishfulfilling cow, because of the offering of flowers. 
5::9::25::(The mansion) was so full of effulgence and soul ravishing that it served as an adornment even to splendour. It looked as though it banished all sorrow and was a source of prosperity.
5::9::26::The chamber of Ravana, like a mother, gratified all the five senses of Hanuman with proper objects of the senses.
5::9::27::'This may be heaven or world of gods. It may be Amaravati, the abode of Indra or else it may be the supreme achievment (of the Creator), thought Maruti৷৷
5::9::28::Seeing the golden lamps that stood burning steadily, Hanuman thought they looked like  gamblers in deep thought defeated by expert  gamblers in a game of dice.
5::9::29::Hanuman fancied that the entire place was set ablaze with the glow of lamps, the lustre of Ravana and the brilliant glow of Ravana's ornaments (everything was shining).
5::9::30::He found thousands of beautiful women seated on carpets wearing different clothes and garlands and dressed in various attires.
5::9::31::Drinking and sporting until midnight, they had dropped off to sleeptired.
5::9::32::Fast asleep, sounds of their ornaments silenced, the young women looked like a large bed of lotuses with swans and bees sitting calm without their usual noise.
5::9::33::Hanuman looked at the faces of the wellbred young women with closed eyes and concealed teeth, fragrant like lotuses.
5::9::34::The faces of the women looked like blooming lotuses at daybreak, their petals closed up again at night.
5::9::35::The intoxicated bees would again and again long to enjoy these beautiful faces which were like blooming lotuses.
5::9::36::The illustrious Hanuman felt it to be correct to compare those faces with lotuses for their fragrance.
5::9::37::Brightened by (the beauty of) the maidens, the mansion shone like the autumnal sky endearing  and pleasing with stars.
5::9::38::The lord of demons surrounded by women shone like the beautiful Moon encircled by stars.
5::9::39::Seeing those women lying together Hanuman imagined them to be numerous meteors dropped from heaven after enjoying their merits, enjoyed and exhausted.
5::9::40::It was clear that the grace and lustre of those women looked brilliant like the lustre and grace of brilliant stars releasing an auspicious glow.
5::9::41::Garlands displaced and jewels scattered, they were drowsy due to drink and sexual exercise. 
5::9::42::A few young women had their circular vermilion mark (on the forehead) smudged, some had their anklets loosened and a few had their necklaces.
5::9::43::Some had their strings of pearl broken, others had their clothes slipped off, and some had their waist belts snapped. They were like young mares fallen to rest after carrying heavy loads.
5::9::44::With their good eartops broken and flower garlands crushed some looked like blooming creepers in a dense forest crushed by mighty elephants.
5::9::45::The pearl chains, large and shining like rays of the Moon in the space between the breasts looked like sleeping swans.
5::9::46::The vaidurya worn by women (on the breasts) looked like Kadamba birds while the golden chains put on by some others appeared like ruddy geese.
5::9::47::Their hips were like river banks crowded with swans, karandava and Chakravaka birds shining like rivers.
5::9::48::With their tiny bells round their girdle looking like buds, the bold golden ornaments like lotuses, their gestures of love like crocodiles and their radiant beauty like silver banks, the women looked like smoky rivers.
5::9::49::The beautiful imprints made by the (heavy) ornaments on the tender limbs, breasts and nipples of some women appeared like many ornaments.
5::9::50::Shaken by the breath released from their mouths the fringes of the garments of some women were drawn towards their faces again and againfluttering.
5::9::51::The fringes of their garments glowing beautifully close to the faces of the wives (of Ravana) with different beautiful hues, shone splendid like flags.
5::9::52::The eartops of some women endowed with auspicious charm were swinging softly generating a gentle sound by the touch of their breath.
5::9::53::The sweet smell of wine emitted from their mouth and the natural fragrance of their breath was refreshing to Ravana  as if it was serving him at that time.
5::9::54::Some women of Ravana (overcome by blind passion) smelt again and again the mouths of their cowives next to them  assuming it to be Ravana's.
5::9::55::Even though the beautiful wives (should have been angry with their cowives for smelling their mouths) they behaved pleasingly, having no freedom to act with Ravana
5::9::56::Some women slept pillowed on their arms, laying aside their adornments and others had their garment under the head as pillows and lay in sleep.
5::9::57::Some women lay placing their arms on the breasts of the other while their own arms were used as pillow by another. One woman placed her head  on the lap of the other and slept.
5::9::58::Given to intoxication and sex, the women slept touching one another's thighs, sides, hips, back and lap of the other, with their limbs intertwined.
5::9::59::Knit with the shoulders of one another like a garland of flowers intertwined with the tipsy bees resting the women shone.
5::9::60::The women of Ravana appeared like a garden in spring. They were as if a cluster of  creepers blossomed in spring due to the caresses of the breeze. They were knit together as one string forming a garland, flowers of one creeper striking the other. The joints of these creepers had grown strong when tangled together. Shaken by the breeze, the bees resting on one creeper would go to the other.
5::9::61::It was not possible to distinguish clearly between their jewels, limbs, garments and garlands and to place them in the right spots.
5::9::62::When Ravana was happily asleep, the gods of light burning on the gold lampposts gazed without winking as it were, at the women, whom they dare  not gaze for fear of waking Ravana.
5::9::63::The women halled from the families of royal sages, ancestral deities, daityas and demons who were infatuated with him.
5::9::64::Many were brought by Ravana as captives of war and some came on their own deluded by lust.
5::9::65::Except Sita no other woman among them had been taken there by force. They were won only on account of his valour and virtues. None loved any one earlier and none was married to others. 
5::9::66::None among them was born of a lowly family, nor lacked beauty, kindness, skill, strength or brightness. No one was not lovable to Ravana.
5::9::67::'If the lawful wife of Rama born of a good family can be allowed to remain with Rama in the same way as the consorts of the lord of demons, how fortunate it would be, thought the wise lord of monkeys'.
5::9::68::Hanuman once again assuming his true form said to himself, 'Sita is surely a virtuous lady superior to and more distinguished than them all. Alas, this lord of Lanka committed an ignoble, act (by abducting her).इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे नवमस्सर्गः।Thus ends the ninth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
