5::19::1::ततः then, तस्मिन् काले एव at that time, राजपुत्री princess, अनिन्दिता blameless, वरारोहा of beautiful waist, वैदेही Vaidehi, रूपयौवनसम्पन्नम् endowed with beauty and youth, भूषणोत्तमभूषितम् adorned with best of ornaments, राक्षसाधिपम् lord of demons, रावणम् Ravana, दृष्ट्वैव  just by seeing him, प्रवाते  strong wind, कदली यथा like the banana plant, प्रावेपत was shaken. 
5::19::2::विशालाक्षी largeeyed one, वरवर्णिनी a woman of fair complexion, ऊरुभ्याम् with thighs, उदरम् her belly, बाहुभ्याम् with both arms, पयोधरौ her breasts, आच्छाद्य after covering, रुदन्ती while crying, उपविष्टा was seated. 
5::19::3::दशग्रीवस्तु even the tennecked Ravana on his part, राक्षसीगणैः by groups of shedemons, रक्षिताम् protected by, वैदेहीम् Vaidehi, दुःखार्ताम् tormented with grief, अर्णवे in the ocean, सन्नाम् drowned, नावमिव boat like, सीताम् Sita, ददर्श saw. 
5::19::4::असंवृताम् on a bare, धरण्याम् on the ground, आसीनाम् seated, संशितव्रताम् one who is woeful, छिन्नाम् broken, भूमौ on the ground, प्रपतिताम्  fallen, वनस्पतेः of a tree, शाखामिव like a branch. 
5::19::5::मलमण्डनचित्राङ्गीम् covered with colourful dust, मण्डनार्हाम् deserved adornment, अमण्डिताम् without any ornament, पङ्कदिग्धा dipped in mud, मृणालीव a lotus stem, विभाति  shining न विभाति च and not shining. 
5::19::6::सङ्कल्पहयसंयुक्सैः yoked to horses of her determination, मनोरथैः with the chariot of her mind, विदितात्मनः bestowed with selfknowledge, राजसिंहस्य of the supreme king, रामस्य Rama's, समीपम् to the presence, गच्छन्तीमिव as though she was moving.
5::19::7::शुष्यन्तीं emaciated, रुदतीम्  crying, एकाम् alone, ध्यानशोकपरायणाम्  absorbed in thought and grief, दुःखस्य of grief, अन्तम् end, अपश्यन्तीम् not finding, रामाम् Rama, रामम् Rama alone, अनुव्रताम् thinking. 
5::19::8::तथा in that way, आविष्टाम् sitting, वेष्टमानाम् coiled around, पन्नगेन्द्रवधूमिव like the queen of serpents, धूमकेतुना by comet, ग्रहेण by the planet, धूप्यमानाम् smoking, रोहिणीमिव like Rohini. 
5::19::9::धार्मिके in a righteous, आचारवति in a traditional, वृत्तशीलकुले in a traditional virtuous family, जाताम् born, संस्कारम् refinement, आपन्नाम् attained, दुष्कुले in a bad afmily, पुनः again, जातामिव च as though born into.
5::19::10::अभूतेन by false, अपवादेन scandals, निपतिताम् lowered, कीर्तिमिव like fame, आम्नायानाम् of the Vedic studies, अयोगेन by not applying, प्रशिथिलाम् let loose, विद्यामिव like education. 
5::19::11::सन्नाम् grown dim, महाकीर्तिमिव like great fame, विमानिताम् slighted, श्रद्धामिव like faith, परिक्षीणाम् meddled with, पूजामिव like worship, प्रतिहताम् frustrated, आशामिव like hope. 
5::19::12::विध्वस्ताम् blasted, आयतीमिव like the prospect, प्रतिहताम् flouted, आज्ञामिव like the command, काले at the time of catastrophe, दीप्ताम् glowing, दिशमिव like the direction, अपहृताम् abducted, पूजामिव like worship 
5::19::13::विध्वस्ताम् blighted, पद्मिनीमिव like lotus creeper, हतशूराम् whose gallant warriors are killed, चमूमिव like the army, तमोध्वस्ताम् by darkness shadowed, प्रभामिव like radiance, उपक्षीणाम् dried, आपगामिव like the stream.
5::19::14::परामृष्टाम् defiled, वेदीमिव like the altar of worship, शान्ताम् extinguished, अग्निशिखामिव like the blazing flames, राहुग्रस्तेन्दुमण्डलाम् like the fullmoon eclipsed by Rahu, पैर्णमासीम् fullmoon, निशामिव like the night. 
5::19::15::हस्तिहस्तपरामृष्टाम् destroyed by the trunks of elephants, उत्कृष्टपर्णकमलाम् lotus pond with excellent leaves, वित्रासितविहङ्गमाम् with frightened birds, आकुलाम् crushed, पद्मिनीमिव like the lotus creeper.
5::19::16::पतिशोकातुराम् stricken with grief caused by separation from her husband, विस्राविताम् with its water grown thin, शुष्काम् dried, नदीमिव like the river, परया with great, मृजया ablution, हीनाम् deprived, कृष्णपक्षनिशामिव like the night during the dark fortnight.
5::19::17::सुकुमारीम् delicate, सुजाताङ्गीम् a lady with beautiful limbs, रत्नगर्भगृहोचिताम् who deserves to be in a gemcrusted house, तप्यमानाम् being scorched, अचिरोद्धृताम् just plucked out, मृणालीमिव like the lotus stem. 
5::19::18::गृहीताम् held, स्तम्भे to a pillar, आलिताम् tied, यूथपेन विना कृताम् separated from her lord, the leader of the herd, निःश्वन्तीम् sighing heavily, सुदुःखार्ताम् with intense grief, गजराजवधूमिव like a royal female elephant. 
5::19::19::दीर्घया with a long, एकया even with a single, वेण्या  braid of hair, अयत्नतः carelessly, शोभमानाम् beautifullooking, नीरदापाये at the end of rain, नीलया with dark, वनराज्या with a row of trees, महीमिव like the land. 
5::19::20::उपवासेन by fasting, शोकेन due to grief, ध्यानेन due to brooding, भयेन च and  threatenings, परिक्षीणां a wasted, कृशाम् emaciated, दीनाम depressed, अल्पाहाराम् ate little, तपोधनाम् rich by austerities. 
5::19::21::देवतामिव like a goddess, दुःखार्ताम् tormented with grief, भावेन mentally, रघुमुख्यस्य to the foremost of the Raghu family, Rama, दशग्रीवपराभवम् insult by Ravana, प्राञ्जलिं with folded hands, आयाचमानाम् seemed as though supplicating. 
5::19::22::समीक्षमाणाम् a lady casting glances, रुदतीम् crying, अनिन्दिताम् blameless, सुपक्ष्मताम्रायतशुक्ललोचनाम् with attractive eyelashes and broad bright eyes, अतीव very much, रामम् about Rama, अनुव्रताम् devoted, मैथिलीम् Mythili, रावणः Ravana, वधाय to kill, प्रलोभयामास tried to allure. 
