5::35::1::वैदेही Vaidehi, वानरर्षभात् from the bull among vanaras, ताम् that, रामकथाम् Rama's story, श्रुत्वा heard, मधुरया in sweet, गिरा word, सान्त्वम् polite, इदम् these, वचनम् words, उवाच spoke. 
5::35::2::ते to you, रामेण with Rama, संसर्गः contact, क्व where, लक्ष्मणम् Lakshmana, कथम् how, जानासि do you assess, वानराणाम् of vanaras, नराणां च a human, समागमः union, कथम् how, आसीत् took place.
5::35::3::वानर O vanara, रामस्य Rama's, लक्ष्मणस्य च and Lakshmana's, यानि those, लिङ्गानि identification marks, तानि those, समाचक्ष्व you may tell, माम् to me, भूयः again, शोकः sorrow, न not, समाविशेत् entire account. 
5::35::4::तस्य his, रामस्य Rama's, लक्ष्मणस्य Lakshmana's, संस्थानम् form, कीदृशम् how, रूपम् form, कीदृशम् how does his look, ऊरू thighs, कथम् how, बाहू arms, कथम् how, मे to me, शंस tell.
5::35::5::वैदेह्या by Vaidehi, एवम् in that manner, उक्तः spoken, मारुतात्मजः son of the Windgod, हनुमान् Hanuman, ततः thereafter, रामम् Rama, यथातत्त्वम् as it is, आख्यातुम् to describe, उपचक्रमे he started telling. 
5::35::6::कमलपत्त्राक्षि eyes like lotus petals, वैदेहि Vaidehi, जानन्ती even though you know, दिष्ट्या by good fortune, भर्तुः husband's, लक्ष्मणस्य च and Lakshmana's, संस्थानम् form and distinguishing marks, परिपृच्छसि have asked, बत indeed. 
5::35::7::विशालाक्षि O largeeyed lady, रामस्य Rama's, यानि लक्षणानि those distinguishing marks, लक्ष्मणस्य च and Lakshmana's, यानि those, लक्षितानि signs, तानि them, वदतः as I describe, मे myself, शृणु listen. 
5::35::8::जनकात्मजे O Janaka's daughter, रामः Rama, कमलपत्त्राक्षः one who has eyes like lotus petals, सर्वसत्त्वमनोहरः one who delights all beings, रूपदाक्षिण्यसम्पन्नः endowed richly with charm and politeness, प्रसूतः born with. 
5::35::9::तेजसा in effulgence, आदित्यसङ्काशः vies with the Sun, क्षमया in tolerance, पृथिवीसमः equals the earth, बुद्ध्या in intelligence, बृहस्पतिसमः equal to Brihaspathi, यशसा in fame, वासवोपमः equals Indra. 
5::35::10::परन्तपः scorcher of enemies, जीवलोकस्य of the world of living beings, रक्षिता protector, स्वजनस्य of his own people, अभिरक्षिता protector, स्वस्य of his own, वृत्तस्य of the race, धर्मस्य च and guards righteousness 
5::35::11::भामिनि O beautiful lady, रामः Rama, लोकस्य world's, चातुर्वर्ण्यस्य of the four classes of society, रक्षिता protector, सः he, लोकानाम् of all the worlds, मर्यादानाम् code and conduct, कर्ता maker, कारयिताचैव will make others follow. 
5::35::12::अर्चिष्मान् luminous, अत्यर्थम् intensely, अर्चितः worshipped, ब्रह्मचर्यव्रते observing the vow of selfcontrol, स्थितः one who is steadfast, साधूनाम् for the holy men, उपकारज्ञः recognises right action, कर्मणाम् rites, प्रचारज्ञश्च  of the ways of  administration.
5::35::13::राजविद्याविनीतश्च welltrained in statecraft, ब्राह्मणानाम् of the brahmins, उपासिता a devotee, श्रुतवान् learned in scriptures, शीलसम्पन्नः endowed with excellent conduct, विनीतः is disciplined, परन्तपः  is a scorcher of enemies. 
5::35::14::यजुर्वेदविनीतश्च versed in Yajurveda, वेदविद्भिः by the knowers of the Vedas, सुपूजितः respected, धनुर्वेदे च and in Dhanurveda also, वेदेषु in other Vedas also, वेदाङ्गेषु च Vedangas (auxillary Vedas) also, निष्ठितः is an expert. 
5::35::15::देवि goddess like lady, रामः Rama, विपुलां सः broadshouldered, महाबाहुः strongarmed, कम्बुग्रीवः with conchshaped neck, शुभाननः with an auspicious countenance, गूढजत्रुः has round shoulders, सुताम्राक्षः copperyred eyes  जनैः in all worlds, श्रुतः renowned. 
5::35::16::दुन्दुभिस्वननिर्घोषः his tone is resonant like the drums, स्निग्धवर्णः has beautiful shining complexion, प्रतापवान् full of valour, समः not too tall or short, समविभक्ताङ्गः his limbs are symmetrical, श्यामम् dark, वर्णम् colour, समाश्रितः has proportionate limbs. 
5::35::17::त्रिस्थिरः has the three stiff limbs (chest, fist and wrists), त्रिप्रलम्बश्च long in three (arms, eyebrows and scrotum), त्रिसमः has three even parts (locks of hair, knees and testicles), त्रिषु elevated in three parts (abdomen, navel and chest), उन्नतः raised, त्रिषु च all the three parts (soles, nails and eyes), स्निग्धः has coppery reddish colour, नित्यशः all over, त्रिषु in the three parts (the underlines of feet, the hair and the reproductive  organs), गम्भीरः is majestic. 
5::35::18::त्रिवलीवान् has three folds on his neck, स्त्र्यवनतः his nipples and middle of his soles are depressed, चतुर्व्यङ्गः four parts of his body are depressedneck, penis, shanks and back, त्रिशीर्षवान् has three spirals in the head, चतुष्कलः has four lines under his thumb, चतुर्लेखः has four lines on the forehead, चतुष्किष्कुः he is four cubits in height, चतुस्समः he has arms, knees, cheeks and thighs well proportioned  
5::35::19::चतुर्दशसमद्वन्द्वः he is person with the fourteen parts of his body (eyebrows, nostrils, eyes, ears, lips, nipples, elbows, wrists, knees, testicles, loins, arms, legs and buttocks) in good proportion, चतुर्दंष्ट्रः he is one with four sharp teeth, चतुर्गतिः he moves like a lion, leopard, elephant and bull as occasion demands, महोष्ठहनुनासश्च he has sharp nose, charming lips and jaws, पञ्चस्निग्ध: he is one with five smooth parts (hair, eyes, skin, teeth and feet), अष्टवंशवान् his eight parts of the body (backbone, trunk, limbs, fingers, toes, nose, eyes and testicles) are long. 
5::35::20::राघवः Rama, दशपद्मः ten lotuslike limbs (eyes, face, mouth, tongue, lips, cheeks, nipples, nails, feet and hands), दशबृहत् he is one with ten wellproportioned limbs (head, forehead, ears, neck, chest, heart, belly, hands, legs, buttocks), त्रिभिः covered with three aspects (splendour, fame and glory), व्याप्तः well known, द्विशुक्लवान् two white limbs teeth and eyes, षडुन्नतः he has six elevated  limbs (nose, shoulders, forehead, chest and arm pits), नवतनुः has nine fine features (moustache, nails, knuckles, beard, skin, hair, penis, acumen, perception), त्रिभिः he pursues spiritual merit, worldly comforts and sensual delight in three periodsforenoon, middday and evening of the day, व्याप्नोति follows righteous principles. 
5::35::21::सत्यधर्मपरः established in truth and righteousness, श्रीमान् prosperous, सङ्ग्रहानुग्रहे रतः he is involved in both accumulation and favourable disposition towards others, देशकालविभागज्ञः who discharges his duties at proper time and place, सर्वलोकप्रियंवदः who is loved by all for his endearing words.
5::35::22::तस्य his, द्वैमात्रः born of a different mother, भ्राता brother, अपराजितः one who has never been defeated, सौमित्रिः Saumitri, अनुरागेण in affection, रूपेण in charm, गुणैश्चैव in virtues, तथाविधः similar to him. 
5::35::23::नरशार्दूलौ tiger among men, तौ they, उभौ both, त्वद्दर्शनसमुत्सुकौ eager to see you, कृत्स्नाम् entire, महीम् earth, विचिन्वन्तौ both searching for, अस्माभिः by us, अभिसङ्गतौ they met us.
5::35::24::त्वामेव for you, मार्गमाणौ while searching, वसुन्धराम् all over the earth, विचरन्तौ while both were wandering, तौ they both, बहुपादपसङ्कुले filled with many trees, ऋश्यमूकस्य पृष्ठे on the mountain Rshyamuka, आसीनम् seated, पूर्वजेन by the elder brother, अवरोपितम् one who has been thrown out, भ्रातुः brother's, भयार्तम् frightened, प्रियदर्शनम् one who is pleasing to see, मृगपतिम् lord of animals, सुग्रीवम् Sugriva, ददर्शतुः both of them saw.
5::35::25::वयं तु we too, पूर्वजेन by his elder brother, राज्यात् from the kingdom, अवरोपितम् deposed, सत्यसङ्गरम् one who is committed to truth, हरिराजम् king of vanaras, तम् him, सुग्रीवम् Sugriva, परिचर्यामहे we serve him. 
5::35::26::ततः then, चीरवसनौ clad in bark robes, धनुःप्रवरपाणिनौ armed with powerful bows, तौ both, ऋश्यमूकस्य शैलस्य on the Rshyamukha mountain, रम्यम् beautiful, देशम् location, उपागतौ both reached. 
5::35::27::सः he, वानरर्षभः bull among vanaras, धन्विनौ armed with bows, तौ both of them, नरव्याघ्रौ tigers among men, दृष्ट्वा on seeing, भयमोहितः deluded with fear, तस्य from that, गिरेः mountain, शिखरम् top, अभिप्लुतः jumped. 
5::35::28::ततः thereafter, सः he, वानरेन्द्रः lord of vanaras, तस्मिन् on that, शिखरे mountain top, व्यवस्थितः staying there, मामेव me only, तयोः of both of them, समीपम् towads, सत्वरम् quickly, प्रेषयामास sent.
5::35::29::अहम् I, सुग्रीववचनात् according to the instruction of Sugriva, पुरुषव्याघ्रौ two tigers among men, प्रभू two lords, रूपलक्षणसम्पन्नौ both endowed with charming appearance and auspicious marks, तौ both, कृताञ्जलिः joined palms in salutation, उपस्थितः approached. 
5::35::30::परिज्ञाततत्त्वर्थौ realised the true position, प्रीतिसमन्वितौ filled with pleasure, पुरुषर्षभौ two bulls among men, तौ both, मया by me, पृष्ठम् back, आरोप्य placing, तं देशम् to that place, प्रापितौ carried. 
5::35::31::महात्मने to the great self, सुग्रीवाय to Sugriva, तत्त्वेन faithfully, निवेदितौ reported by me, तयोः of both of them, अन्योन्यसल्लापात् got to know each other through conversation, भृशम् fond, प्रीतिः friendship, अजायत developed. 
5::35::32::ततः then, प्रीतिसम्पन्नौ full of joy, तौ both, हरीश्वरनरेश्वरौ king of monkeys and the king of people, पूर्ववृत्तया with their past, कथया with account, परस्परकृताश्वासौ they consoled each other. 
5::35::33::ततः thereafter, सः he, लक्ष्मणाग्रजः the elder brother of Lakshmana, उरुतेजसा with great prowess, भ्रात्रा by the brother, वालिना by Vali, स्त्रीहेतो on account of a woman, निरस्तम्  deposed, सुग्रीवम् Sugriva, सान्त्वयामास consoled. 
5::35::34::ततः then, लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, अक्लिष्टकर्मणः one who is adept in accomplishing tasks with ease, रामस्य Rama's, त्वन्नाशजम् on account of your loss, शोकम् grief, वानरेन्द्राय to the lord of vanaras, सुग्रीवाय to Sugriva, न्यवेदयत् revealed. 
5::35::35::सः he, वानरेन्द्रस्तु to the king of vanaras, लक्ष्मणेन by Lakshmana, ईरितम् spoken वचः words, श्रुत्वा having heard, तदा then, ग्रहग्रस्तः overshadowed by the planet, अंशुमानिव like the Sun, अत्यर्थम् extremely, निष्प्रभः lustreless, आसीत् became.  
5::35::36::ततः at that time, रक्षसा by the demon, ह्रियमाणया when you were borne away, त्वद्गात्रशोभिनी adorned your limbs, यानि those, आभरणजालानि bundle of ornaments, पातितानि dropped down, तानि सर्वाणि all of them, आनीय brought, हरियूथपाः vanara leaders, संहृष्टाः with great joy, रामाय to Rama, दर्शयामासुः showed, तव your, गतिं तु whereabouts, न विदुः did not know. 
5::35::37::मयैव by me, उपहृतानि collected, तानि those ornaments, रामाय to Rama, दत्तानि gave, तस्मिन् them, विगतचेतसि lost senses, स्वनवन्ति making jingling sound, अवकीर्णानि having scattered. 
5::35::38::दर्शनीयानि beautiful ones, तव your, तानि those, अङ्के on his lap, कृत्वा having placed, देवप्रकाशेन by an effulgent one looking like the divine, तेन by him, देवेन divine self, बहुविधम् in many ways, परिदेवितम् wailed.
5::35::39::तानि them, पश्यतः as looked at, रुदतः while he wept, पुनः पुनः again and again, ताम्यतश्च  regretting, दाशरथेः Dasaratha's son Rama's, शोकहुताशनम् fire in the form of grief, तानि them, प्रादीपयन् inflamed.     
5::35::40::दुःखार्तेन immersed in sorrow, तेन by him, महात्मना by the great self, शयितं च lay down, मयापि by me also, विविधैः by many, वाक्यैः by words, कृच्छ्रात् with great difficulty, पुनः again, उत्थापितः helped to get up. 
5::35::41::महाबाहुः longarmed one, सः राघवः that Rama, सहसौमित्रिः along with Lakshmana, तानि those, मुहुः मुहुः again and again, दर्शयित्वा after showing, सुग्रीवे to Sugriva, न्यवेदयत् presented.
5::35::42::आर्ये O divine lady, सः राघवः that Rama, तव your, अदर्शनात् separation from you, नित्यम् always, ज्वलता burning, महता great, अग्निना in fire, अग्निपर्वतः इव like a mountain of fire, परितप्यते  ever blazing. 
5::35::43::त्वत्कृते on account of, महात्मानम् the great one, तं राघवम् that Rama, अनिद्रा च not sleeping, शोकः grief, चिन्ता च intense anxiety, अग्न्यगारम् like a furnace, अग्नयः इव like the three fires, तापयन्ति keep intensely heated. 
5::35::44::तव your, अदर्शनशोकेन by the sorrow of not being able to see you, राघवः Rama of Raghu dynasty, महता with great, भूमिकम्पेन by earthquake, महान् great, शिलोच्छयः lofty mountain, प्रविचाल्यते is shaken. 
5::35::45::नृपात्मजे daughter of a king, त्वाम् you, अपश्यन् unable to see, सुरम्याणि very delightful, काननानि forests, नदीः rivers, प्रस्रवणानि च and streams, चरन् while moving, रतिम् happiness, न आप्नोति not finding. 
5::35::46::जनकात्मजे Oh daughter of Janaka, मनुजशार्दूलः a tiger among men, सः राघवः that Rama, समित्रबान्धवम् along with his friends and relatives, रावणम् Ravana, हत्वा after killing, त्वाम् you, क्षिप्रम् soon, प्राप्स्यति will attain. 
5::35::47::तदा then, रामसुग्रीवौ Rama and Sugriva, उभौ both, सहितौ together with, वालिनम् Vali, हन्तुम् to kill, तथा likewise, तव your, अन्वेषणम् search, समयम् agreement, अकुरुताम् reached.   
5::35::48::ततः thereafter, वीराभ्याम् by both the heroes, ताभ्याम् by both of them, कुमाराभ्याम् by both princes, किष्किन्धाम् to Kishkinda, समुपागम्य after reaching, हरीश्वरः king of vanaras, सः that, वाली Vali, युद्धे in war, निपातितः killed. 
5::35::49::ततः then, रामः Rama, आहवे in a combat, तरसा quickly, वालिनम् Vali, निहत्य killed, सुग्रीवम् Sugriva, सर्वर्क्षहरिसङ्घानाम् for all troops of vanaras, पतिम् king, अकरोत् made. 
5::35::50::देवि Oh Illustrious lady, रामसुग्रीवयोः of both Rama and Sugriva, ऐक्यम् alliance, एवम् in that way, समजायत established, माम् me, तयोः their, दूतम् messenger, आगतम् came here, हनुमन्तम् Hanuman, विद्धि you may know. 
5::35::51::सुग्रीवः Sugriva, स्वराज्यम् his kingdom, प्राप्य having obtained, महाबलान् great army, हरीश्वरान् monkey leaders, समानीय after collecting, त्वदर्थम् for your sake, दश ten, दिशः directions, प्रेषयामास sent. 
5::35::52::वानरेन्द्रेण by the monkey leaders, महौजसा very powerful one, सुग्रीवेण by Sugriva, आदिष्टाः ordered, अद्रिराजप्रतीकाशाः huge as the Himalayas, king of mountains, सर्वतः all over, महीम् the earth, प्रस्थिता started moving. 
5::35::53::ततः then, ते they, वयम् we, अन्ये others, वानराः च and the vanaras, सुग्रीववचनातुराः eager to carry out Sugriva's order, मार्गमाणाः while searching, कृत्स्नाम् entire, वसुधाम् the earth, चरन्ति we are moving about. 
5::35::54::लक्ष्मीवान् prosperous, वालिसूनुः Vali's son, महाबलः mighty, अङ्गदो नाम called Angada, हरिशार्दूलः a tiger among vanaras, त्रिभागबलसंवृतः together with one third of the army, प्रस्थितः departed. 
5::35::55::विन्ध्ये in Vindhya, पर्वतसत्तमे in the great mountain, विप्रणष्टानाम् of those who were lost, भृशम् greatly, शोकपरीतानाम् of those immersed in sorrow, तेषाम् of all of them, नः of us, अहोरात्रगणाः many nights and days, गताःpassed 
5::35::56::ते वयम् we were, कार्यनैराश्यात् disappointed, कालस्य of the time limit, अतिक्रमेण च exceeding, कपिराजस्य of monkey king's, भयाच्च out of fear also, प्राणान् life also, त्यक्तुम् to give up, व्यवस्थिताः decided. 
5::35::57::वनदुर्गाणि impenetrable forest forts, गिरिप्रस्रवणानि च mountain streams, विचित्य having searched, देव्याः the queen's, पदम् feet, अनासाद्य by not getting, प्राणान् life, त्यक्तुम् to give up, समुद्यताः we decided. 
5::35::58::वैदेहि oh Vaidehi, प्रायोपविष्टान् when we decided to die, सर्वान् all, वानरपुङ्गवान् vanara leaders, दृष्ट्वा on seeing, अङ्गदः Angada, भृशम् intensely, शोकार्णवे in the sea of sorrow, मग्नः plunged, तव yourself, नाशं च not found, तथा वालिनः similarly Vali's, वधं च and his killing, जटायुषः Jatayu's, मरणं च death also, अस्माकम् all of us, प्रायोपवेशम् decision to die, पर्यदेवयत् he was grieved.  
5::35::59::स्वामिसन्देशात् according to the king's cmmand (that who ever overstays would be killed), निराशानाम् disappointed, मुमूर्षताम् when we were desiring to die, तेषाम् for such of us, नः to us, कार्यहेतोरिव as if to fulfil the task, वीर्यवान् powerful, महान् gigantic, शकुनिः bird, आयातः came. 
5::35::60::गृध्रराजस्य of the king of vultures, सोदर्यः brother, सम्पातिर्नाम called Sampati, गृध्रराट् king of birds, भ्रातृवधम् death of Jatayu, श्रुत्वा on hearing, कोपात् with anger, इदम् this, वचनम् word, अब्रवीत् spoke. 
5::35::61::मे my, यवीयान् younger, भ्राता brother, केन by whom, हतः was killed, क्व where, निपातितः was he dropped, वानरोत्तमाः of best of vanaras, भवद्भिः by you, एतत् this, आख्यातुम् to tell, इच्छामि I desire. 
5::35::62::त्वाम् you, उद्दिश्य aiming at, भीमरूपेण by a dreadful person, रक्षसा by the demon, जनस्थाने in Janasthana, महद्वधम् great killing, यथातथम् as it happened faithfully, अङ्गदः Angada, तस्य to him, अकथयत् told. 
5::35::63::वरारोहे oh charming lady, सः he, अरुणात्मजः Aruna's son, जटायुषः Jatayu's, वधं death, श्रुत्वा having heard, दुःखितः became sad, त्वाम् yourself, रावणालये in Ravana's palace, वसन्तीम् living, शशंस narrated to us. 
5::35::64::तस्य his, सम्पातेः Samapati's, प्रीतिवर्धनम् that which was pleasing, तत् that, वचनम् word, श्रुत्वा having heard, अङ्गदप्रमुखाः Angada and others, वयम् all of us, तूर्णम् quickly, ततः from there, प्रस्थिताः departed. 
5::35::65::प्लवङ्गमाः vanaras, त्वद्दर्शनकृतोत्साहा enthused to see you, हृष्टाः joyfully, तुष्टाः satisfied, विन्ध्यात् from Vindhya, उत्थाय having got up, सागरस्य towards the sea, उत्तरम् अन्तम् the limit of the northern direction, सम्प्राप्ताः reached. 
5::35::66::अङ्गदप्रमुखाः Angada and other leaders, सर्वे all, त्वद्दर्शनमुत्सुकाः enthusiastic to see you, वेलोपान्तम् sea shore, उपस्थिताः reached, भीताः they were frightened, पुनः again, चिन्ताम् worry, जग्मुः felt. 
5::35::67::अथ then, अहम् I, सागरम् ocean, प्रेक्ष्य after looking at, सीदतः in desperate mood, हरिसैन्यस्य Vanara army's, तीव्रम् intense, भयम् fear, व्यवधूय after pushing aside, योजनानाम् of yojanas, शतम् one hundred, प्लुतः leaped. 
5::35::68::राक्षसाकुला filled with demons, लङ्का चापि Lanka also, मया by me, रात्रौ at night, प्रविष्टा entered, मया by me, रावणश्च Ravana also, दृष्टः is seen, शोकपरिप्लुता immersed in sorrow, त्वं च you also. 
5::35::69::अनिन्दिते O sinless lady, देवि O divine lady, एतत् this, सर्वम् everything, यथावृत्तम् as it happened, ते to you, आख्यातम् narrated, माम् me, अभिभाषस्व you may speak, अहम् I, दाशरथेः Dasaratha's son, दूतः messenger. 
5::35::70::देवि O divine lady, तं माम् such me, रामकृतोद्योगम् have taken up Rama's mission, त्वन्निमित्तम् on your account, इह here, आगतम् came, सुग्रीवसचिवम् minister of Sugriva, पवनात्मजम् son of Vayu, बुद्ध्यस्व you may know. 
5::35::71::सर्वशस्त्रभृताम् among all wielders of weapons, वरः supreme, तव your, काकुत्स्थ Rama of the Kakutstha race, कुशली he is keeping well, गुरोः of his venerable teacher, आराधने in service, युक्तः engaged, सुलक्षणः a man of auspicious signs, लक्ष्मणश्च Lakshmana also. 
5::35::72::देवि O queen, वीर्यवतः of valourous, तव your, भर्तुः husband's, तस्य his, हिते seeking welfare, रतः engaged, अहम् I, सुग्रीववचनात् at the behest of Sugriva, इह here, एकः alone, प्राप्तः reached. 
5::35::73::त्वन्मार्गविचयैषिणा while searching for your location, कामरूपिणा by a person who can take any form at will, असहायेन without any help, चरता while moving, मया by myself, इयम् this, दक्षिणा दिक् southern direction, अनुक्रान्ता reached. 
5::35::74::दिष्ट्या fortunately for me, अहम् I, त्वन्नाशम् your loss, अनुशोचताम् regretting, हरिसैन्यानाम् of the vanara army, सन्तापम् grief, तव your, अभिगमशंसनात् by letting them know, अपनेष्यामि I will dispel their sorrow. 
5::35::75::देवि oh queen, दिष्ट्या luckily, मम my, सागरलङ्घनम् crossing the ocean, न व्यर्थम् is not wasted, दिष्ट्या fortunately, अहम् I, त्वद्दर्शनकृतम् by the act of seeing you, इदम् thus, यशः fame, प्राप्स्यामि I will attain. 
5::35::76::महावीर्यः mighty hero, राघवश्च Raghava, समित्रबान्धवम् accompanied by friends and relatives, राक्षसाधिपम् king of demons, रावणम् Ravana, हत्वा after killing, क्षिप्रम् very soon, त्वाम् yourself, अभिपत्स्यते will reach you. 
5::35::77::वैदेहि Vaidehi, गिरीणाम् among the mountains, उत्तमः the best one, माल्यवान्नाम Malyavan, गिरिः mountain, ततः from there, केसरी Kesari, हरिः monkey, गोकर्णम् Gokarna, पर्वतम् mountain, गच्छति went. 
5::35::78::देवर्षिभिः by the divine sages, दिष्टः predicted, मम my, पिता father, सः महाकपिः that great monkey, नदीपतेः of lord of rivers, ocean, पुण्ये holy, तीर्थे in a place, शम्बसादनम् Sambasadanam, उद्धरत् raised.
5::35::79::मैथिलि Mythili, अहम् I, तस्य his, हरिणः monkey's, क्षेत्रे in the land, वातेन by the Windgod, जातः born, स्वेन कर्मणा एव by my own act, लोके by people, हनुमानिति Hanuman, विख्यातः came to be known. 
5::35::80::वैदेहि Vaidehi, विश्वासार्थम् for inspiring confidence, मया by me, भर्तुः  your husband's, गुणाः qualities, उक्ताः are described, देवि O queen, राघवः Raghava, अचिरात् very soon, त्वाम् you, इतः from here, नयिता he will take you away, अनघे lady free from sins.
5::35::81::शोककर्शिता tormented by grief, सीता Sita, एवम् in that way, हेतुभिः with possible reasons, विश्वासिता having trusted, उपपन्नैः by the evidences, अभिज्ञानैः with identification, तम् him, दूतम् as a messenger, अवगच्छति she understood.  
5::35::82::जानकी Janaki, अतुलम् immeasurable, हर्षम् happiness, गता च experienced, प्रहर्षेण in her joy, वक्रपक्ष्माभ्याम् through her curved eyelashes, नेत्राभ्याम् from both eyes, आनन्दजम् arising out of joy, जलम् tears, मुमोच shed. 
5::35::83::विशालाक्ष्याः of largeeyed lady, तस्याः her, चारु lovely, ताम्रशुक्लायतेक्षणम् having wide white eyes with tinge of red corners, तत् that, वदनम् face, राहुमुक्तः released from Rahu, उडुराडिव like the Moon, अशोभत shone. 
5::35::84::सा she, हनुमन्तम् Hanuman, व्यक्तम् clearly, कपिम् the monkey, मन्यते realised, अन्यथा इति none other than, अथ then, हनूमान् Hanuman, प्रियदर्शनाम् a lady pleasing to see, ताम् her, उत्तराम् later, उवाच spoke. 
5::35::85::मैथिलि Mythili, ते to you, एतत् सर्वम् everything, आख्यातम् is narrated, समाश्वसिहि calm down, किम् what, करोमि shall I do, ते to you, कथं वा or how, रोचते it pleases, अहम् I, प्रतियामि I will go back. 
5::35::86::मैथिलि Maithili, संयति in a fight, शम्बसादने Sambasadana, असुरे when the demon, कपिप्रवरेण mighty monkey, महर्षिचोदनात् by the command of great sage, हते सति where he was slain, अथ then, वायुप्रभवः by the spread of wind, प्रभावतः by his prowess, तत्प्रतिमः equal to him, वानरः vanara, अस्मि I am. 
