5::45::1::ततः then, सप्तार्चिवर्चसः energetic like fire, महाबलपरीवाराः endowed with great army, धनुष्मन्तः experts in archery, महाबलाः mighty, कृतास्त्राः अस्त्रविदाम् distinguished wielders of weapons, श्रेष्ठाः foremost, परस्परजयैषिणः wished to conquer each other, अमितविक्रमाः very valiant, सप्त seven, ते they, मन्त्रिणः ministers, सुताः sons, राक्षसेन्द्रेण by the lord of ogres, चोदिताः directed, संहृष्टाः gladly, तप्तकाञ्चनचित्राणि decked with shining gold, चापानि bows, विष्फारयन्तः by sporting, तटित्वन्तः shining with lightning, अम्बुदाः इव like storm clouds, हेमजलपरिक्षिप्तैः decked with golden mesh, ध्वजवद्भिः bearing staffs, पताकिभिः with flags,तोयदस्वननिर्घोषैः making sounds like stormy clouds, वाजियुक्तै: yoked to horses,महारथैः with great chariots, तस्मात् from that, भवनात् from the palace, निर्ययुः departed. 
5::45::2::ततः then, तेषाम् their, सबान्धवसुहृज्जनाः with friends and relatives, जनन्यस्तु mothers, किंकरान् kinkaras, हतान् killed, विदित्वा having known, कसम्भ्रान्ताः were agitated with grief, बभूवुः became.
5::45::3::तप्तकाञ्चनभूषणाः barnished ornaments of gold, ते they, परस्परसङ्घर्षात् by dashing against each other, तोरणस्थम् at the main archway, अवस्थितम् stood, हनूमन्तम् Hanuman, अभिपेतुः attacked. 
5::45::4::रथगर्जितनिस्वनाः the rattling of the chariots mixed with the roaring of the warriors, ते they, नैऋताम्बुदाः the clouds of demons, बाणवृष्टिम् torrent of arrows, सृजन्तः sent forth, वृष्टिमन्तः thundering, अम्भोदाः इव like the storm clouds, विचेरुः went about.  
5::45::5::ततः then, ताभिः by them, शरवृष्टिभिः by the shower of arrows, अवकीर्णः scattered all over, हनुमान् Hanuman, वृष्टिभिः with shower of rain, संवृताकारः covered, शैलराडिव like the king of mountains, अभवत् appeared. 
5::45::6::आशुचरः moving fast, सः कपिः that monkey, विमले in the clear, अम्बरे  sky, विचरन् moving, तेषां वीराणाम् of the heroes, शरान् by the arrows, रथवेगं च and the speed of their chariot, मोघयामास rendered futile.    
5::45::7::व्योम्नि in the sky, धनुष्मद्भिः with those bows in their hands, तैः by them, क्रीडन् while sporting, सः वीरः that hero, अम्बरे in the sky, धनुष्मद्भिः armed with rainbow, मेघैः by the clouds, प्रभुः god, मारुतः यथा like the wind, प्रकाशते shining. 
5::45::8::वीर्यवान् valiant one, सः he, घोरम् terrific, निनदम् sound, कृत्वा making, ताम् that, महाचमूम् great army, त्रासयन् frightening, तेषु रक्षस्सु those ogres, वेगम् speed, चकार created. 
5::45::9::परन्तपः scorcher of enemies, कांश्चित् some, तलेन with palm, अभ्यहनत् hit, कांश्चित् some, पादैः with feet, कांश्चित् some, मुष्टिना with fist, अभ्यहनत् struck, कांश्चित् some, नखैः with nails, व्यदारयत् pierced . 
5::45::10::कपिः monkey, कांश्चित् some, उरसा with his chest, अपरान् and others, ऊरुभ्याम् with his thighs, प्रममाथ strangled, केचित् a few, तस्य his, निनादेन by the roar, तत्रैव there itself, भुवि on the ground, पतिताः fell down. 
5::45::11::तेषु when they (sons of minister), अवसन्नेषु were annexed, भूमौ on the ground, निपतितेषु च when fallen dead on the ground, ततः then, सर्वम् all, तत् that, सैन्यम् army, भयार्दितम् struck with fear, दश दिशः in all ten directions, अगमत् fled. 
5::45::12::नागाः elephants, विस्वरम् discordantly, विनेदुः trumpeted in fear, वाजिनः horses, भुवि on ground, निपेतुः fell down, भूश्च the earth also, भग्ननीडध्वजच्छत्रैः with broken seats, parasols, flag staffs, रथैः by chariots, कीर्णा अभवत् strewn all over. 
5::45::13::अथ then, स्रवता flowing, रुधिरेण by blood, पथि way, स्रवन्त्यः flowed, दर्शिताः seen, तदा then, लङ्का Lanka, विविधैः with many, स्वरैः with sounds, विकृतम् horrifying cries, ननाद roared. 
5::45::14::वीरः hero, महाबलः mighty one, चण्डपराक्रमः whose valiance was fierce, सः कपिः that Hanuman, प्रवृद्धान् the ogres who were old and grew stronger, तान् राक्षसान् those gaints, विनिहृत्य slayed, अन्यैः others, राक्षसैः by ogres, युयुत्सुः desiring to wage war, पुनरेव once again, तम् that, तोरणमेव archway, अभिजगाम went forth. 
