5::16::1::Hanuman, the bull among monkeys, admired the laudable Sita and the virtuous Rama and once again began to lament.
5::16::2::Sagacious Hanuman, eyes dimmed with tears, thought for a short while on the plight of Sita and lamented
5::16::3::If Sita, who is worshipped by righteous Lakshmana and loved by Rama is tortured like this, it shows it is difficult to trangress the force of time.
5::16::4::Just as river Ganga is not agitated by the rainbearing clouds, this Sita is not perturbed as she is aware of the prowess of Rama and might of Lakshmana.
5::16::5::Sri Rama matches Vaidehi perfectly in character, age, behaviour, birth and auspicious signs. She is aware that he is the right person for her. Rama deserves Vaidehi and this blackeyed lady deserves him.
5::16::6::On seeing her glowing like fresh gold resembling goddess Lakshmi who is dear to the entire world, and thinking of Rama, Hanuman said:
5::16::7::It was for the sake of this largeeyed Sita that the powerful Vali and the heroic Kabandha who was equal to Ravana in heroism were killed.
5::16::8::Rama  killed Viradha of fearsome valour in the forest like Sambara by Indra.
5::16::9::
5::16::10::Ogres like Khara and Trisira and the powerful Dooshana were kileed in battle by Rama endowed with selfknowledge.
5::16::11::On her account Sugriva obtained the coveted kingdom ruled by Vali which was a difficult proposition, and retained supremacy in the world. 
5::16::12::On account of the largeeyed Sita I ventured to cross  the lord of rivers, the sea, and came to this city.
5::16::13::Even if Rama turns this land stretching to the ocean upside down or even the entire world on account of her, it is justifiable, according to me.
5::16::14::The sovereignty over the three worlds will weigh less than one sixteenth part of Janaka's daughter, Sita.
5::16::15::She had risen from the land when tilled by the plough and was covered with auspicious paddy dust resembling the pollen grains of lotuses, this daughter of Janaka, the great righteous ruler of Mithila, This lady with unswerving devotion to her husband.
5::16::16::This celebrated lady is the eldest daughterinlaw of the noble, valiant king Dasaratha who never returned from the battleground without being victorious.
5::16::17::She is the loving wife of the righteous, grateful, wise and selfrealised Rama. She has fallen into the hands of these shedemons.
5::16::18::On account of her immense love towards her husband she has given up all kinds of luxuries, not caring for suffering. She was satisfied with fruits and roots in the desolate forest. Engaged in serving her husband, she experienced utmost joy as in her own palace. A lady of golden complexion who had not experienced suffering earlier is subjected to sorrow and is tolerating calamities in this way 
5::16::19::Rama deserves to see her.Just as a thirsty man longs for the source of water, Rama pines for this highly virtuous lady who is tormented by Ravana.
5::16::20::Just as a king who had lost his kingdom feels happy on regaining it, surely Raghava will feel exhilarated when he gets her back.
5::16::21::Deprived of all sensual pleasures, and separated from her relatives, she is surviving with the hope of meeting them.
5::16::22::She is looking at neither the shedemons nor these trees full of flowers and fruits. She is surely thinking of Rama with a singleminded  attention.
5::16::23::Indeed, the husband is the greatest ornament for a married woman. Hence though deserving adornment she does not like it, bereft of her husband who is her only ornament.
5::16::24::Lord Rama indeed performs a difficult task in surviving without her. That he is not feeling despondent is a wonder.
5::16::25::Sita who is endowed with beautiful dark hair and eyes like a hundredpetalled lotus, who deserves to be happy is in sorrow. I grieve to see her in this state. 
5::16::26::She who has beautiful eyes like lotus petals, was protected by the arms of both Rama and Lakshmna, who is tolerant like the earth and is guarded by the female demons of hideous appearance under a tree.
5::16::27::Deprived of her charm, she resembles a lotuscreeper blasted by frost. This daughter of Janaka has reached a pitiable condition afflicted by series of calamities. She resembles a famale Chakravaka separated from her mate.
5::16::28::The top branches of Ashoka trees bent down with blossoms and the Moon rising with thousands of cool rays at the end of winter (when spring sets in) beholding which she should be delighted intensfy her sorrow.
5::16::29::Hanuman, the swiftfooted bull among monkeys, on his part waiting on the Simsupa  tree thus reflecting concluded in his mind that she was Sita.इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीय आदिकाव्ये सुन्दरकाण्डे षोडशस्सर्गः।Thus ends the sixteenth sarga of Sundarakanda of the holy Ramayana, the first epic composed by sage Valmiki.
