6::51::1::Then Ravana and all the Rakshasas heard the increasing and highly tumultuous sound made by the courageous Vanaras.
6::51::2::Thereafter, hearing the loud and deep sounds of roaring and seeing his (Ravana's) ministers in the midst, he spoke as follows.
6::51::3::Many Vanaras have collected together and roared making loud noises just as thunder rumbling clouds. By that there is no doubt that they are very happy. For that reason, even the wide ocean is agitated.
6::51::4::The two brothers Rama and Lakshmana are bound by sharp arrows. By the loud noise that I hear I doubt in my mind!
6::51::5::Having spoken like that to the ministers, the Lord of Rakshasas said to the Rakshasas who stood waiting close by.
6::51::6::For what reason are the Vanaras (rangers of woods) rejoicing that way in the time of grief? It may be found out speedily.
6::51::7::Ravana having said so, the bewildered Rakshasas scaling the boundary wall beheld the army protected by great Sugriva and the prosperous Raghavas relieved from arrows and happy, he became worried.
6::51::8::All the dreadful Rakshasas getting down the boundary wall with pale faces, sad countenance reached the Lord of Rakshasas.
6::51::9::Rakshasas who were well versed in talking, desperately conveyed the unpleasantness as it is to Ravana.
6::51::10::The two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, who are like powerful elephants have been set free from the bondage of arrows of Indrajith in the battlefield. Their shoulders are relieved and are like elephants snapped off the rope binding them.
6::51::11::The Rakshasa king endowed with mighty prowess became pale in face, worried and enraged on hearing the words of Rakshasas.
6::51::12::My enemies who are bound by the formidable and unfailing, sharp, poisonous and bright arrows like the sun of Indrajith blessed with boons, are liberated from the bondage! I doubt if my army is in danger!
6::51::13::My arrows which are equal in brilliance to Vasuki by which my enemies' life was taken away has become in fructuous now.
6::51::14::Having said so, hissing Ravana called Dhumraksha to the midst.
6::51::15::Dhumraksha of fierce prowess, you along with a huge Rakshasa army go just now to destroy Rama along with able Vanaras.
6::51::16::Commanded by the Intelligent king of Rakshasas in that manner, Dhumraksha offered prayers and went from there joyfully.
6::51::17::There after Dhumraksha went from the gateway and said to the CommanderinChief of the army Get ready immediately and start quickly. Why delay?
6::51::18::On hearing the words of Dhumraksha, the CommanderinChief of the large army, he got ready quickly by the order of Ravana.
6::51::19::Mighty army bound with girdles of bells to their waist, of fierce form roaring surrounded Dhumraksha joyfully.
6::51::20::The dreadful Rakshasas set out roaring like rain clouds armed with different kinds of weapons, like tridents, darts, maces, spears, iron bars, rods, even clubs, spears and slings, arrows in thousands.
6::51::21::And others collected together holding shields, fearless like tigers, frightful in appearance, mounted on fast horses, chariots yoked to donkeys of different kinds covered with gold mesh, on maddened elephants Set out.
6::51::22::Dhumraksha of frightful tone mounted on a chariot adorned with gold yoked to donkeys with lion and bear like faces.
6::51::23::Heroic Rakshasa, Dhumraksha surrounded by rakshasas set forth laughing to the west gate where Hanuman stood.
6::51::24::While the Rakshasa was mounted on the chariot and going braying like a donkey, a fearful bird going in the sky stood before his chariot.
6::51::25::A foul smelling frightening vulture (that feeds on the dead body) descended on top of the chariot and fell down.
6::51::26::A trunk of a white bird drenched in blood sounding discordant fell near by Dhumraksha. It appeared like a rain god shedding blood on the ground.
6::51::27::Thunder like roar was heard. Wind blew adversely. Darkness pervaded, and directions could not be seen.
6::51::28::Then Rakshasa feared seeing the dreadful manifestation and got worried. All the Rakshasas walking in front of Dhumraksha lost consciousness.
6::51::29::Thereafter many strong and powerful Rakshasas surrounding Dhumraksha, who was enthusiastic about war, beheld many Vanaras protected by Raghava like at universal dissolution.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकपञ्चाशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the fifty first sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
