6::112::1::Vibheeshana, seeing his brother killed and lying in the battlefield, lamented immersed in sorrow.
6::112::2::O valiant, powerful and renowned king! You who were skilled in all fields and in polity, accustomed to a sumptuous bed, why are you lying on ground?
6::112::3::Decked with armlets, motionless are your arms, broken, knocked down with the crown, radiant like the Sun.
6::112::4::Hero! That which was predicted by me earlier, which did not find your favour due to your infatuation, has come true.
6::112::5::Either Prahastha or Indrajith or other Rakshasas, or even Kumbhakarna, an exceeding car warrior, nor Atikaya or Naranthaka or you also did not care for my counsel. Its consequence has come now.
6::112::6:: As this hero, the wielder of weapons has fallen down on ground, the prudent one who was at boundary, disappeared he who was the form of righteousness, departed he who was a repository of might, thrown down and out of sight he, who was praiseworthy for all, lost position. With the hero falling down, it seems the Sun has fallen down, the moon plunged into darkness, fire became extinct, and the enthusiasm of people wasted.
6::112::7::With the tiger among the Rakshasas fallen asleep like this in the dust in the battlefield, strength of the people departed. What is left in this world?
6::112::8::The great tree in the form of Rakshasa king, with its firmness as leaves, stubbornness as its blossom, austerity as strength, valour as strong roots, was crushed by the tempest of Raghava in the battlefield.
6::112::9::Ravana's prowess as tusks, father and grand fathers' race as back of the body, wrath as lower body and graciousness as proboscis, overthrown by a lion in the shape of Ikshvaku race having killed him he is lying asleep thrown down.
6::112::10::The prowess and exceeding energy of Ravana as flames, his sighs as smoke, his own strength as heat, endowed with might, that fire of Rakshasa has been extinguished by the rainy cloud in the shape of Rama in the battlefield.
6::112::11::Rakshasas who followed as tails, humps and horns, Ravana the conquerors of enemies, like elephants in pride, animality as ears and eyes, the bull in the form of Rakshasa Ravana was killed by Rama, the master of earth in the form of tiger.
6::112::12::Thus spoke Rama to Vibheeshana, who was overcome with sorrow and speaking with reason, his determined opinion.
6::112::13::This Ravana is not destroyed without power in war. He is of terrible prowess, of extraordinary enthusiasm and fought without any fear and fallen.
6::112::14::Those kings who follow duty steadfast, desiring advancement, fearless in the battlefield, who die in that way should not be mourned.
6::112::15::He who is wise, and the three worlds fear him, including Indra, the Lord of gods, when brought under the sway of death according to timespirit, should not be mourned.
6::112::16::Not only that, in war, he will only will be victorious is not true now or before. Hero may kill the enemy or will be killed by the enemy.
6::112::17::This course has been practised in the past by ancient kings for those killed in war. Warrior killed in war is not to be mourned', is true.
6::112::18::In principle, in that way, decide the action, freed from grief, considering what action is required.
6::112::19::Having spoken that way by the valiant prince to Vibheeshana, who was immersed in grief, spoke to Rama for the good of his brother.
6::112::20::He who has not been defeated in battle by even gods or Indra combined together in a trial of strength has been routed by you like the flow of the ocean divides on reaching the shore.
6::112::21::He bestowed gifts to mendicants, nurtured dependents, filled his friends with wealth, and held grudges against enemies and destroyed them.
6::112::22::He maintained sacrificial fire and practised austerities. He mastered vedas and was even doing rituals. To the foremost brother's departed soul, I desire your permission to do the rituals.
6::112::23::There is no use of enmity after death. You may carry out his last rites. That way I am also your relation.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेद्वादशोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः।।This is the end of one hundred and twelfth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
