6::18::1::Having heard Hanuman (son of wind god) formidable Rama was highly pleased at heart and started to tell his opinion.
6::18::2::Even I desire to speak a few words about Vibheeshana. I wish you, who are my well wishers and devoted to me, also hear me.
6::18::3::Although he (Vibheeshana) has defects, as he has come here with a friendly feeling, I cannot reject him. Good people are not reprehensible.
6::18::4::Then Sugriva, the leader of Vanaras reflecting on what was spoken by Rama said these words favouring Rama.
6::18::5::Let this Rakshasa (night ranger) be a wicked one or not a wicked one, what have we to worry about such a person? He has come here abandoned by his brother and who will not send away such a person? Who will not do so?
6::18::6::On hearing the words of the king of Vanaras, Rama of Kakuthsa dynasty and of truthful valour looked at all and threw a smile slightly at meritorious Lakshmana and spoke these words.
6::18::7::That which has been spoken by the Lord of monkeys in this way is not possible for one who has not studied sastras or served the elders.
6::18::8::It strikes me that in this regard, as it is openly known for all the kings or at least in a subtle manner from a worldly point of view.
6::18::9::When in difficulty kings of the same clan of adjoining countries keep attacking the renowned and so they are declared as enemies. It is on account of this cause he (Vibheeshana) has come here.
6::18::10::The sinless ones respect the kings of their clan as friendly ones. But by and large such kings also do not believe the virtuous ones among the kings.
6::18::11::I will tell you what the scriptures have said about the demerit in accepting an enemy's strength that you have spoken. You may listen.
6::18::12::We do not belong to their clan. Among Rakshasas there are some learned ones. Vibheeshana has come because of his desire for their (Rakshasa) kingdom, perhaps ?
6::18::13::Kinsmen will not be satisfied with one another and are not free from anxiety. That way they will not be together. Vibheeshana who has come out of fear in this way crying loudly for help and is worthy to accept.
6::18::14::O dear All brothers cannot be like Bharata, all sons will not be like me, or all friends like you.
6::18::15::When Rama had spoken that way, sagacious Sugriva along with Lakshmana got up and saluted him and spoke these words to Rama.
6::18::16::Rama, you are exceptional in excusing Vibheeshana. Realize that he has been dispatched here by Ravana. I consider befitting for you to captivate him.
6::18::17::O sinless mightyarmed Rama I believe that this Rakshasa has been sent to come here covertly to strike at you or me or Lakshmana. On knowing that you are here the cruel Ravana's brother has come greedily along with his counsellors to kill you.Sugriva the chief of the army, who was good at speech and adept in expression, having said to Rama, the best among the Raghu race, remained silent thereafter.
6::18::18::Having heard the words of the leader of Vanaras that were nobler, Rama spoke these auspicious words.
6::18::19::Whether this night ranger is wicked or not wicked, is he capable of doing even subtlest harm to me?
6::18::20::O leader of the Vanara troop If I so desire, I can kill with the tip of my big finger the devils, Danavas, Yakshas and the Rakshasas on this earth.
6::18::21::You have heard of the (story of a) dove that offered his own flesh to an enemy who came to seek protection according to tradition (of hospitality).
6::18::22::O Supreme Vanara When the fowler who had carried away the mate came near the dove it received him and in turn protected him. What more can a man like me do?
6::18::23::In the past Kanva's son called Kandu, a sage and a truthful one used to sing verses inculcating righteousness. (I shall recite) You may listen.
6::18::24::O scorcher of enemies To one who greets reverentially with folded hands and begs for protection, we should not be cruel, and he is not to be killed.
6::18::25::An enemy who comes for protection against another enemy should be protected, even giving up one's own life whoever he may be, even if he is afflicted or arrogant.
6::18::26::If one does not protect, or give refuge, according to his capacity out of fear, desire (to gain) or delusion, the sin acquired by him will be censured by the world.
6::18::27::One who fails to protect a refugee who seeks protection from him is ruined in the eyes of the refugee and he takes away all the merit.
6::18::28::One who resorts to failure in protecting a refugee, will be doing a great sin that way and will be shut out of heaven, be infamy and his strength and virility will be lost.
6::18::29::Excellent and meaningful words have been said by sage Kandu (about one who protects a refugee), that is by doing one's righteous duty. He will be not only famous but reach heaven as a result of his action.
6::18::30::I will provide protection from all living beings for the one who seeks protection from me and begs in this way. This is my vow.
6::18::31::O best of Vanaras Sugriva Either Vibheeshana or any one by himself and even Ravana who is unprotected thus seeks security from me, I will offer protection.
6::18::32::Having heard the inciting words spoken by Rama so lovingly, the king of Vanaras replied.
6::18::33::What wonderful words have been spoken by you, Rama? You are the knower of righteous duty, protector of the world, a virtuous and upright one.
6::18::34::My inner self is aware that this Vibheeshana is pure. He has been tested in all respects with doubtful feelings.
6::18::35::Rama therefore, let this highly sagacious Vibheeshana be with you like a friend in equal terms and enjoy.
6::18::36::Perceiving Sugriva's befitting words, king Rama went to meet Vibheeshana like Indra arranged to meet with the king of birds.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेअष्टादशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the eighteenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
