6::6::1::Considering the terrifying, dreadful action that was carried by the great soul Hanuman who was like Indra in might, the Lord of Rakshasas felt a bit shy and bending down his head addressed all Rakshasas.
6::6::2::(Hanuman) After all a monkey in size, entered the inaccessible city of Lanka, destroyed it and saw Sita, daughter of king of Janaka.
6::6::3::Hanuman destroyed huge mansions, killed topmost Rakshasas and shattered all the city of Lanka.
6::6::4::What is the best thing to do now? What should we do ultimately? What is advisable to do? What strategy is effective? You may suggest that which is good for us.
6::6::5::O mighty Rakshasas Wise elders say that through wise counsel victory is possible. Therefore, in the case of Rama I am thinking of seeking your advice.
6::6::6::In the world, men are of three kinds  good, mediocre and lowly. It is difficult to know their differences. I will tell you about the flaws in their characteristics.
6::6::7::He who decides, after deliberating with his wellwishers, with capable ministers of good counsel, relatives of common interest or friends before undertaking his task and tries with faith in god is said to be best among men.
6::6::8::He who thinks solitarily (not with others), deliberates with in his mind on his duty and executes his tasks, is said to be a (mediocre) a mediocre one.
6::6::9::He who fails to consider the merits and de merits, decides to do on his own and begins without faith in god saying, 'I' will do it, is a lowly one among men.
6::6::10::Just as among men there are good, intermediate and lowly people invariably their counsel is also of three kinds  good, mediocre and lowly.
6::6::11::When all ministers are unanimous and come to one conclusion based on sastras, and having come together remain firm, such counsel is said to be the best.
6::6::12::The conclusion in which many ministers have different points of view and attain unanimity in decision after meeting different points of view is a mediocre vision.
6::6::13::Where counsellors with different opinions hold on to their individual opinions that pleases them and are not for the outcome of a unanimous decision, such a counsel is said to be bad.
6::6::14::On account of that, O wise ones Think over very well, rightly of the task to be done and determine the action required by me now.
6::6::15::Accompanied by thousands of Vanaras, Rama is approaching to besiege us and reaching the city of Lanka.
6::6::16::Rama who is worthy of his might, accompanied by his brother and army will be able to cross the ocean speedily and easily.
6::6::17::Rama may dry up the ocean or do something else out of his power. If Vanaras come and encounter us, we will clash with him. When his army has set out that way, you may advise me of a plan that benefits the army and city of Lanka.।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषष्ठमस्सर्गः।।This is the end of the sixth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
