6::32::1::On seeing the esteemed Rama's head and bow, remembering the description made by Hanuman about the friendship with Sugriva thinking of the eyes, complexion of the face, the hair, and curls of her husband at the end Sita recognized the auspicious Chudamani. Identifying all those marks to be like Rama's she felt very sad and cried like a deer and abused Kaikeyi.
6::32::2::O Kaikeyi! Your desire is fulfilled with the killing of the delight of the race. You, who are given to creating quarrel have ruined the race.
6::32::3::Kaikeyi, you have given bark robes to prince Rama and sent him to the forest with me. What harm has he done for you? Thinking of this again and again Sita cried.
6::32::4::That miserable young, Vaidehi, having said so, fell on the ground trembling like a cut off banana plant.
6::32::5::Broadeyed Sita, regaining her consciousness after a while, sat close to the head of Rama and lamented.
6::32::6::O mightyarmed one! Alas you are killed while following heroic vow. I live to see you in the last state of your life, widowed. I am done.
6::32::7::O Rama, you are faithful to your vows, a noble one! It is said that because of a woman's faults, the husband will die. It is not even so as you died in front of a virtuous woman of good conduct.
6::32::8::I am in grief and filled with an ocean of sorrow. You who have come to save me and are also killed.
6::32::9::O Raghava! Even my motherinlaw Kausalya is separated from her dear son just as cow is separated from calf.
6::32::10::O Raghava of incomprehensible valour! the words predicted by astrologers that your life is long is falsified. Your life has been short.
6::32::11::Or else, even the wisdom of a learned one is diffused and lost perhaps! the effect of time which is the cause of all living beings has caused this.
6::32::12::You are the knower of all sastras, and capable of warding off all calamities. How did death have a chance to meet you and overtake?
6::32::13::O lotuseyed Rama! After you have lost contact with me, the most horrible cruel night has killed you cutting you off from me.
6::32::14::O mightyarmed one! A bull among men and a noble one, you are embracing the earth as though it is your beloved and sleeping leaving me in the sky.
6::32::15::O Hero! This bow that was decorated with gold was always worshipped with sandal and flowers diligently by you and me with utmost devotion.
6::32::16::O Sinless one! Surely you have reached heaven where your father, my fatherinlaw Dasaratha and your grandfathers have reached.
6::32::17::In heaven, you will be seeing luminaries of the sky who are dear, who have done great deeds and earned merit and the royal sages of your own race.
6::32::18::O King! I have come to you while I was young. I am your companion and wife also. Why are you not seeing me? Why are you not talking to me?
6::32::19::O Kakutstha! while you held my hand (at the time of marriage) you promised that you will be with me and likewise promised to take me, a (wretched one) with you to the other world. Remembering that I am sad.
6::32::20::O Jewel among those who attained good state! Why have you gone abandoning me dear? To which world have you gone from here? I am pained by your deserting me.
6::32::21::This body which used to be decorated by me with auspicious items, with great respect is dragged by cruel animals.
6::32::22::Why are you, who performed all kinds of sacrificial rituals of fire with all offerings deserve sanctification without doing fire sacrifice?
6::32::23::Seeing only Lakshmana returning, of the three exiled, Kausalya will be immersed in grief (will ask).
6::32::24::When she questions, he may tell that you and your army were killed by the army of friends at night.
6::32::25::Raghava! Hearing that you were killed while asleep and I was taken to the home of Rakshasas, Kausalya will not be able to survive with a broken heart.
6::32::26::On account of an undeserving one, Rama, the son of the emperor, a valiant one who does not deserve to be killed, after having crossed the ocean is killed by a footprint of a cow(easily).
6::32::27::In ignorance as an obloquy of his race, the noble son of Dasaratha married me. For such Rama's wife turned out to be his death.
6::32::28::Undoubtedly I may have obstructed a supreme offering (such as offering a girl in marriage) in some other (previous) life. So now I am pained even though I am the wife of one who is kind to all.
6::32::29::O Ravana! You may quickly join me with my husband as it will be highly auspicious for the wife to join the husband.
6::32::30::O Ravana! Join my head with his and my body with his body. I will follow him in the same way.
6::32::31::Burning in sorrow, the broad eyed Sita gazing at the head of her husband and the bow again and again lamented.
6::32::32::While Sita was wailing in that manner, as said earlier, the Rakshasa guarding her approached the king and offered salutations with both hands.
6::32::33::The Rakshasa (guard) greeted the king saying, Let you be victorious! and announced reverentially, Prahastha, the army chief has arrived.
6::32::34::O Lord! Accompanied by all ministers Prahastha is waiting and sends me desiring to see you.
6::32::35::O great king, endowed with forgiveness and royalty! there is a little urgent work. Undoubtedly, they are waiting to see you please.
6::32::36::On hearing the submission of the rakshasa, the tenheaded king left the Asoka grove to see the ministers.
6::32::37::Having known all about Rama's prowess, Ravana and ministers entered the assembly to think carefully about the task to be carried out and how to do it.
6::32::38::As soon as Ravana departed, that head and the excellent bow vanished from there.
6::32::39::The king of Rakshasas and the ministers of terrific valour then thought about the course of action to be taken against Rama and decided.
6::32::40::The Rakshasa king who resembled the god of death spoke to the heads of army force and wellwishers who stood close by.
6::32::41::Break forth by beating the drums with powerful drumsticks calling the army to assemble without telling the reason.
6::32::42::Then the attendants collected the great powerful army saying, 'so be it', to Ravana who was desirous of war.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्दकाण्डेद्वात्रिंशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the thirty second sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
