6::62::1::He (Kumbhakaran), who was endowed with indomitable prowess, a tiger among Rakshasas, was sleepy and inebriated, marched along the splendid royal path.
6::62::2::Then, Kumbhakarna, who is very difficult to win over, walked violently surrounded by Rakshasas, covered with showers of flowers from houses.
6::62::3::He saw the vast abode of the king of Rakshasas, with lattice work of gold and looking bright like the morning Sun
6::62::4::He saw entering the abode of Lord of Rakshasas like the Sun penetrating into a mass of clouds, from a distance his elder brother seated on the throne just like Indra saw the SelfBorn Brahma on the throne.
6::62::5::While Kumbhakarna accompanied by troops of Rakshasas, was taking strides to his brother's abode, even the earth was shaken.
6::62::6::Having gone to his brother's residence, stepping into the enclosure, he saw his brother seated in a perturbed state.
6::62::7::The ten headed Ravana seeing Kumbhakarna, was delighted and got up quickly and made him come close to him.
6::62::8::Getting up from his seat, Kumbhakarna endowed with extraordinary might bowed down and clasped his brother's feet and asked him, what task he had to do?
6::62::9::Getting up from his seat Ravana embraced and greeted Kumbhakarna. So also, he duly rejoiced and occupied the seat.
6::62::10::Mighty Kumbhakarna, duly took the seat. Enraged Ravana with blood shot eyes spoke these words.
6::62::11::O King! For what purpose have I been awakened by you? Whom are you fearing? I wish to know who is to be ceased in life?
6::62::12::Kumbhakarna, was overcome with anger, and asked his brother Ravana, who was seated and rolling his eyes in anger.
6::62::13::Oh! Kumbhakarna of extraordinary prowess! You were asleep for long happily. You do not know that I am afraid of Rama.
6::62::14::Rama, the son of Dasaratha accompanied by Sugriva, crossed the ocean with an army that was cutting our roots.
6::62::15:: Alas! You see how the Vanaras, arriving at Lanka, crossing the bridge have done away with groves and gardens.
6::62::16::Of the Rakshasas, the chiefs have been killed in war by Vanaras. But I did not see even one Vanara to have been killed in war. Vanaras have not failed to succeed in war.
6::62::17::Mighty strong I am, but such is the fear that has been created in me from them. You have been awakened, to destroy them. Reported Ravana.
6::62::18:: All resources of mine are exhausted. These children and aged are only left in Lanka city, knowing that you will save the city of Lanka.
6::62::19::O broad shouldered brother! Do this task which is difficult for others. O Scourge of enemies! I have not asked you before for such a task.
6::62::20::O Bull among Rakshasas! Being my brother, do this for me. I always have affection for you. Considering that you have encountered war with Devas and Asuras and won both Devas and Asuras, do this help.
6::62::21::O Brother of fierce valour! Get up. I have not seen anyone stronger than you among all beings.
6::62::22::You are a lover of wars. You are a lover of relations. You are always my dear well wisher. O self glorious one! Do this task of throwing out the torrent army just like wind throws rainy clouds.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेष्टितमस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the sixty second sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
