6::96::1::Ravana heard from every house in Lanka sounds of piteous cries and pathetic sounds of the afflicted.
6::96::2::Ravana remained silent for long, thought for a moment and assumed a terrific angry form.
6::96::3::Biting his teeth, eyes turned red in wrath, Ravana was perplexed. He was difficult to look at even for the Rakshasas.
6::96::4::Thus spoke the Lord of Rakshasas indistinctly in anger with his eyes burning as though it would consume them (Rakshasas). He commanded Mahodara, Mahaparsva and Virupaksha who stood nearby saying quickly instruct the army to go.
6::96::5::On hearing the words of the king's order, the Rakshasas stricken with fear, unagitated, started thinking.
6::96::6::All the Rakshasas with frightful looks saying 'Be it so', having prepared themselves with armor went towards the battlefield.
6::96::7::All the great chariot warrior spraying to Ravana with folded palms stood desiring success.
6::96::8::Then Ravana who was deluded with anger, laughing aloud spoke to Mahodara, Mahaparsva and Virupaksha.
6::96::9::Loosening the shafts from the bow, Ravana resembling the Sun at the time of dissolution of the universe said, I shall dispatch Raghava and Lakshmana to the abode of the Lord of death.
6::96::10::Today by the killing the enemy I will take my revenge and also of Khara, Kumbhakarna, Prahastha and Indrajith.
6::96::11::By my arrows covering the sky like clouds there will be no effulgence both in space and in the quarters and not even in the ocean.
6::96::12::Today by the network of plumed arrows released from my bow I shall kill the troops of Vanara leaders' part by part.
6::96::13::Seated on the chariot I shall knock out the Vanara army by the waves in the form of arrows released from the ocean of my bow.
6::96::14::Like an elephant now I shall torment the ponds in the form of battalions of Vanaras shining like the filaments of lotuses, with their faces resembling open lotuses.
6::96::15::Now with the arrows fixed on their faces the Vanara battalions spread on the earth will adorn the earth like lotuses spread on earth.
6::96::16::Today in the combat each one of the arrows released by me will pierce through one hundred monkeys vehemently fighting with trees
6::96::17::Today through the destruction of the enemy I will wipe the tears of the one whose son has been killed, whose brother has been killed.
6::96::18::Today, in the combat, my arrows will split open the Vanaras and ceased of life, they will be covering the earth. It will be possible to see the ground only with effort.
6::96::19::Today I shall provide for whatever animals, eagles or flesheating animals the flesh of enemies killed by my arrows.
6::96::20::Let my chariot and bow be ready and brought here. Let the night rangers who survived follow me.
6::96::21::On hearing the speech of Ravana, Mahaparsva enjoined the mighty leaders of the army standing there and spoke as follows.
6::96::22::Let the army leaders of mighty valour go hurriedly to search in every house in Lanka for Rakshasas.
6::96::23::Then the Rakshasas of terrific looks, and frightening faces holding on shoulders roaring departed with swords, spears, tridents, maces, iron bars, halas, sharp pointed javelins, huge Kutamudgaras, staffs and several discusses, sharp Bhindipalas, Sataghnis and many kinds of excellent weapons.
6::96::24::Then by Ravana's command. the chief of the army with chariot rider brought the chariot yoked to eight horses quickly. Then dreadful and selfeffulgent glowing Ravana ascended the chariot.
6::96::25::Then Ravana surrounded by many Rakshasas set out swiftly rending the earth with all his might and majesty.
6::96::26::Duly permitted by Ravana, Mahaparsva and Mahodara who are difficult to overpower and also Virupaksha ascended their chariots.
6::96::27::Happy leaders, roaring exultantly, as if breaking the earth, emerged, turning round, desiring victory and sallied forth.
6::96::28::Then Ravana surrounded by the army of Rakshasas lifted his bow, like the Lord Yama at the time of dissolution of the universe, went for the battle glowing.
6::96::29::Then from the mighty chariot yoked to exceedingly swift horses, the mighty charioteer made his exit from the entrance and saw Rama and Lakshmana there.
6::96::30::Then the Sun lost his radiance, and the four directions were enveloped by gloom, the birds made fearful noise and the earth shook.
6::96::31::Devas rained blood, horses stumbled, eagles settled on top of the post and jackals howled in a frightening way.
6::96::32::His left eye twitched, left arm quivered, face turned pale and indeed his tone became hoarse.
6::96::33::Thereafter as Ravana set forth for the battle, all the following forms predicting his death appeared.
6::96::34::A meteor had fallen from the sky resembling thunder, coupled with inauspicious eagle cries.
6::96::35::Impelled by the time spirit, Ravana set forth without thinking of the terrific portents that had appeared in delusion for his destruction.
6::96::36::The Vanaras stood facing the great sound of Rakshasa troops, on hearing the sounds of chariots for the sake of battle.
6::96::37::Intense battle took place between the angry Vanaras and Rakshasas challenging one another desiring victory.
6::96::38::There the tenheaded Ravana using arrows adorned with gold plumes struck Vanaras and a great war took place.
6::96::39::Some Vanaras ' heads were deformed, some were pierced in their hearts, and some had their ears cut off.
6::96::40::A few were made lifeless, some had their flanks split, some had their heads smashed and few were deprived of their eyes.
6::96::41::In the battlefield wherever Ravana drove in fury, rolling his eyes filled with anger, the monkey troops could not withstand the speed of his arrows.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषण्णनवतितमस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the ninety sixth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
