6::13::1::Having realized that Ravana has become angry, Mahaparsva of extraordinary strength, thinking of pleasing him for a while greeting him with folded palms, spoke.
6::13::2::Having reached a forest inhabited by wild animals and snakes for honey, whoever does not drink the honey obtained is surely a childish one.
6::13::3::O Destroyer of foes Who is there to question Lord since you are Lord? Setting your foot on the head of enemy you may sport with Sita.
6::13::4::(O Ravana) of great strength Take hold of Sita forcibly like the cock, enjoy and revel with her.
6::13::5::When you have fulfilled your desire, why fear? Let it happen. Let that which is yet to come, happen. You will be able to face.
6::13::6::Kumbhakarna accompanied by Indrajith of extraordinary strength have the power to ward off even if Indra, armed with thunderbolt comes.
6::13::7::Leaving aside charity, conciliation or even by showing dissension, the three means resorted to by the wise people, you will attain success by force.
6::13::8::O Ravana of extraordinary strength We will bring all your enemies under control on their arrival here. There is no doubt.
6::13::9::Ravana, the king of Rakshasas feeling happy about the statement of Mahaparsva, spoke these words.
6::13::10::O Mahaparsva I have certain secret that happened in the past. It was a long time ago and I shall tell you. Listen to it.
6::13::11::While I was going in the sky to the abode of Grandfather Brahma, I saw a celebrated one called Punjikasthala flying concealing herself, glowing like the flame of the fire.
6::13::12::Then her clothes were stripped off by me forcibly and enjoyed her. Then like a violently shaken lotus stem, she went to the abode of Brahma.
6::13::13::Then the high souled Brahma happened to know about that incident, I believe. Enraged Brahma made this statement to me.
6::13::14::From today onwards if you desire to resort to a woman forcefully, your head will break into a hundred pieces. There is no doubt.
6::13::15::Thus, frightened on account of his curse, I do not perforce to get her to my lustrous bed.
6::13::16::My speed is like that of the ocean, my movement is like that of the wind and Dasaratha's son does not know this. Therefore, he is coming to attack me.
6::13::17::He is waking me up like waking up a lion sleeping in the mountain cave. Like waking up death from sleep, he is desiring to instigate me. What sort of a person is he?
6::13::18::Rama has not seen my sharp arrows in comb at that are like the forked flame like the tongues of snakes. So, he is coming towards me.
6::13::19::At once with thunderbolts and meteor like arrows released from my bow will blaze up Rama just like fire sticks whirled at elephants.
6::13::20::Surrounded by a huge army I will split up his army like the morning Sun splits up stars with his radiance.
6::13::21::Even for the thousand eyed Indra or Lord Varuna it is not possible to withstand me in combat. In the past I have won this city ruled by Kubera with huge strength.।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेत्रयोदशस्सर्गः।।This is the end of the thirteenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
