6::27::1::I will describe the Vanara force, who are not caring for their lives for the cause of Raghava. You may see.
6::27::2::One who is of terrific action, whose long tail with plenty of hair of different colours like red, white, yellow with shining ends shining like the scattered rays of the rising sun is holding and dragging on the ground is a leader known as Hara.
6::27::3::Standing in attention near Sugriva are hundreds and thousands of warriors holding huge trees aspiring to climb Lanka and controlling the Vanaras at the back prominently and following.
6::27::4::O King! Standing like dark clouds, black in colour like collyrium, who are of unfailing valour in war, innumerable in numbers, like the small particles of sand on the other bank of ocean, who cannot be counted are moving towards you. They are from mountains, riverbanks, and difficult locations. Those highly ferocious Bears are advancing towards you.
6::27::5::O king! In the midst of these (Vanaras) stands one with frightening eyes and fearful looks, just like Parjanya (RainGod) is surrounded by clouds, is the Lord of all these Bears called Dhumra. He dwells at the great Rkshavana mountain drinking Narmada's (river) water.
6::27::6::See this one like a mountain, he is the brother of Dhumra. Even though he is similar to his brother in body form and his valour is great. As such he is superior among leaders. He is called Jambavan, one of valourous deeds, devoted to elders and intolerant in killing.
6::27::7::His assistance was given to Indra in the war between Devas and demons and in turn he obtained many boons.
6::27::8::Appearing with hairybody glowing like fire like the Rakshasas and demons, many of them in huge form are climbing mountain peaks without caring for death and go about throwing rocks.
6::27::9::O king! This Lord of monkeys, whom whether he is jumping like monkeys or standing is the leader of the leaders, whom the monkeys are looking at standing is called Dhamba, a mighty powerful, fearsome leader and Lord of monkeys. He is surrounded by a strong army like the thousand eyed Indra.
6::27::10::He who stands at one yojana touches a mountain with his flanks, so also gets up and reaches a yojana height with his body, is Sannadana. He is the grandfather of Vanaras. There is no one who has a bigger body size than him among the four legged ones. He had fought war with Indra and is well known for not losing in the battle.
6::27::11::His valour is equal to that of Indra. He is born to Gandharva, a maiden of the god of fire. He was created for the sake of assisting gods in the war between gods and demons.
6::27::12::O King of Rakshasas! This Vanara who is exceptional among Vanaras, a commander of troops by name Krathana, who is not boastful in wars, lives on Kailas, the king of mountains which is frequented by many Kinnaras, on which your brother king Kubera son of Vysravana stays under Jambu tree and strolls for his pleasure.
6::27::13::He is surrounded with thousand crores of his Vanara force and with his own force he intends to crush Lanka.
6::27::14::There is one who roams around Ganga, frightening herds of elephants, remembering the earlier enmity between elephants and Vanaras. This leader of commanders goes about mountain caves, trees and mountains waging war with elephants.
6::27::15::The chief of the army of monkeys and the excellent one among Vanaras revels on the mountain Usirabeejam like the mountain Mandara on the bank of river Hymavathi just as Indra in heaven.
6::27::16::Thousand lakhs of mighty strong Vanaras who are proud of their valour and prowess roaring like lions follow him.
6::27::17::He alone is the leader of the great Vanaras, O king. He is called Pramathi, a commander and a difficult one to resist.
6::27::18::You see him (Pramathi) who resembles a cloud risen up by the wind you may also see the reddish brown dust particles lifted up by excessive whirling of the wind all over and also the furious Vanara army moving swiftly.
6::27::19::These hundred and hundred thousand black monkeys with a tail like that of a cow called Golangulas, endowed with black coloured face, fearsome and with extraordinary strength, watching the bridge constructed, surround Gavaksha the leader, who himself is a Golangula and of great speed. They intend to demolish Lanka with their vigour.
6::27::20::O king! Where the trees give fruit in all seasons which is inhabited by honeybees, whose leaves shine similar to that of Sunshine, where birds animals and all ever shining in golden colour of the Sun, where sages and great souls reside without leaving where trees always yield tasty fruits and have valuable honey in such a delightful golden mountain Vanara leader named Kesari, the chief of all chief Vanaras revels.
6::27::21::O sinless king! there are sixty thousand golden mountains. In the midst of them is this golden mountain just as you are in the midst of the Rakshasas. On the last mountain the Vanaras with brown coloured face, white face, coppery red face and yellow face like honey with sharp teeth like lions, who have nails as weapons, four toothed ones like lions, fearsome ones like tiger, dangerous to approach, all of them like serpents with flaming venomous tongues, with long uplifted tails, like huge elephants in rut in mountain size, roaring like lions, thundering clouds, with round brownish red eyed ones, fearful while walking and causing appalling uproar all of them dwell on the last mountain. They are watching to demolish your Lanka as they look at it.
6::27::22::O king! He who is known as Satabali, is a famous one on the earth, is a valiant hero, a leader. He stands in the middle aspiring for victory ever worshipping Sun. He alone with his army is intending to demolish Lanka.
6::27::23::He is indomitable, strong and heroic. He will not give up his virility. For the pleasure of Rama, he will not feel pity for his life (he will give up his life).
6::27::24::Gaja, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Nila each of these Vanara leaders have ten crores of army under them.
6::27::25::So also, those best of Vanaras of many kinds residing in Vindhya mountain of great valour in large numbers is impossible to count.
6::27::26::O, Monarch! All of them are highly prominent, their stature equal to high hills and all of them are capable of levelling the earth by uprooting and razing its mountains to the ground in a moment.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेसप्तविंशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the twenty seventh sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
