6::8::1::Then a Rakshasa whose body was like a dark cloud, called Prahastha, the heroic chief of the army, spoke these words with folded palms.
6::8::2::Even Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Devils, birds, and serpents, cannot face you in war. What to say of Vanaras?
6::8::3::All of us were inattentive and confident (of our ability) while Hanuman cheated us. When I am alive how will the wanderer of woods (Hanuman) go with life?
6::8::4::I will make all the oceans, mountains, forests or even the entire earth rid of Vanaras if you order me.
6::8::5::O night ranger (Ravana) I will arrange the protection (of this Lanka) from these Vanaras. For your own wrong action (of abducting Sita) you cannot undergo suffering.
6::8::6::Feeling very angry, a Rakshasa called Durmukha said, He who has caused shame for all of us does not deserve to be excused.
6::8::7::Furthermore, this assault by a Vanara on Lanka, to the royal residence, and to the prosperous Lord of Rakshasas is despising.
6::8::8::At this very minute I will go alone into the terrific ocean, to the underworld or the upper world and on entering put an end to the monkey.
6::8::9::Then a mighty strong one who was endowed with diamond like teeth highly enraged, clasping a dreadful iron bludgeon stained with flesh and blood spoke.
6::8::10::While unassailable Rama is there, along with Lakshmana and Sugriva, what have we to do with miserable, pitiable and helpless Hanuman?
6::8::11::Now I would go alone and with the iron crowbar, kill Sugriva Lakshmana and Rama and return after shattering the Vanara troops.
6::8::12::O King If you like, listen to my other statement: One who is cunning and is vigilant would win over an enemy.
6::8::13::O Lord of Rakshasas Thousands of fearful Rakshasas capable of assuming any form at free will, heroic ones of frightful appearance should tell Rama the foremost of Raghus, quietly going near him in human form.
6::8::14::'We have been sent by your younger brother Bharata and he is coming here very soon with the army.
6::8::15::Then from here we will go there wielding tridents, javelins, maces, swords and arrows.
6::8::16::Staying in the sky in groups, we will rain astras, sastras and boulders on the Vanara troops and on killing them, we shall send them to the abode of God of death.
6::8::17::When Rama and Lakshmana are distressed that way, they would certainly succumb to our cunning ways and give up life.
6::8::18::Thereafter the enraged heroic and valiant son of Kumbhakarna called Nikumbha said to Ravana, who made the world cry.
6::8::19::Let all of you stay here along with the king. Going alone I will kill Rama along with Lakshmana, and Hanuman also Sugriva and all of the Vanaras.
6::8::20::Then a Rakshasa called Vajrahanu, mountain like in form, enraged, licking lips with his tongue said these words.
6::8::21::All of you giving up fear, do your duties freely move happily sporting and drinking sweet wine. Single handed, I will consume all the Vanara army.
6::8::22::I alone will kill that Rama with Lakshmana, Sugriva, that Angada, Hanuman and the Vanara army.।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेअष्टमस्सर्गः।।This is the end of the eighth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
