6::72::1::On hearing that Atikaya was killed by highly energetic Lakshmana, the king was overtaken by emotion and spoke as follows.
6::72::2::Dhumraksha, a highly intolerant one, Akampana, the foremost of the Rakshasas and skilled in the use of bow and arms, in the same way Prahastha, Kumbhakarna of stupendous valour and heroes among Rakshasas desiring for combat, who have never been defeated and conquerors of hostile armies, have been killed. Great heroes of huge body, skilled in the use of many weapons and other warriors have been killed by Rama.
6::72::3::Both the famous brothers, Rama and Lakshmana were bound with arrows by my heroic son Indrajith who is conferred with boons and whose strength is well known.
6::72::4::That formidable bond which could not be undone by Devatas, mighty Demons, Yakshas, Gandharvas, and Kinnaras got released by both the brothers, Rama and Lakshmana by their powers and conjuring tricks which are not known to me.
6::72::5:: All those heroes who have gone by my order for combat, have been killed in the battle by mighty Vanaras.
6::72::6::I do not see any warrior who will be able to wage with that Lakshmana, or his army, or with Sugriva, Vibheeshana or with Rama to put an end to them.
6::72::7::Rama's valour is great the strength of his missiles is great, and his valour is formidable. Rakshasas can't stand his range.
6::72::8::This city and even the Ashoka grove where Sita is kept secretly to be guarded by being vigilant on all sides.
6::72::9::Wherever the troops are posted here and there be it exit, or entrance should be checked again and again and not to go out.
6::72::10::Surrounded by the army on all sides, whoever it may be, keep watching the movement of Vanaras.
6::72::11:: At all times, whether it is evening or midnight or early morning, Vanaras movements are to be watched by the army without indifference. Indeed, the army should be active or inactive, standing, advancing constantly and staying wherever they are.
6::72::12::On hearing the words of the king of Lanka all Rakshasas and the great army got up.
6::72::13::Ravana, the king of Rakshasas, enjoined the Rakshasas and himself bearing the thorn of wrath, entered the abode desperately.
6::72::14::Then the mighty Lord of night rangers, inflamed by wrath brooding over (his son's death) was again and again sighing.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेद्विपप्ततितमस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the seventy second sarga of Yuddha Kanda, of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
