6::75::1::Sugriva, the king of Vanaras called Hanuman to make him know the task ahead and said these words.
6::75::2:: As Kumbhakarna is killed and his sons are destroyed, Ravana may not putup defence again. I think.
6::75::3::Of the bulls among vanaras, endowed with prowess, whoever is quick, able and foremost, let them go to Lanka, the abode of Ravana.
6::75::4::Thereafter the bulls among Vanaras turned their faces towards Lanka and went holding torches in hand, after the Sun set as the frightening night started.
6::75::5::Vanara troops went all over with torches and chased by them, the Rakshasas at the gates ran instantly.
6::75::6::Rejoiced Vanaras set fire to the towering gates, attics, different streets as well as mansions to send away Rakshasas.
6::75::7::Then thousands of their houses were burnt by fire (consumer of offerings), and mountain like mansions collapsed to the ground.
6::75::8::There, in Lanka, incense and the best of sandalwood was burnt. Nay even glossy pearls, gems and diamonds were also burnt.
6::75::9::Their white linen and beautiful silks were burnt. Nay, even several blankets of wool, chests and weapons were also burnt.
6::75::10::Different kinds of peculiar kinds of ornaments used to decorate horses, ornaments worn round the neck and girths of elephants, and polished chariot decorations.
6::75::11::Leather armour of the warriors, shields of horses, excellent bow strings, swords, arrows, goads, lances, and javelins.
6::75::12::With fire all over, rugs made of hair of animals, whisks made of fur of animals, tiger skins, musk, wonderful pearls, and gems in laid dwellings of many kinds, and clusters of war weapons were burnt.
6::75::13::The fire consumed many kinds of wonderful homes of Rakshasas, with loved ones on the best beds, their armour made of gold Rakshasas decked with garland s and best of attire their eyes inebriated with intoxication, shaking while walking slowly, holding their loved ones, seized with anger against enemies, holding mace and tridents in hand, eating, drinking and sleeping on the best beds, fast asleep some out of fear taking their sons going quickly and all of them dwelling there in hundreds and thousands were burning again and again.
6::75::14::The fire consumed the houses which were strong and impenetrable, with many enclosures, magnificent ones, constructed in gold in the shape of a half moon and full moon, windows endowed with wonderful pictures. All over the rooms were high on top, decorated with gems, and as if touching the Sun. It was rendered noisy with notes of herons and peacocks, playing of Veena, and jingling of ornaments like the vibration of sounds. The dwellings which looked like mountains were consumed by fire.
6::75::15::The archways covered with a touch of fire shone like lightning in summer, girt round like clusters of clouds.
6::75::16::The mansions burnt by fire fell down like a huge mountain struck by a thunderbolt.
6::75::17::The lovely women sleeping in burnt mansion tops screamed loudly in desperation saying 'Alas! Oh Oh!' and removing their ornaments.
6::75::18::Like peaks of mountains struck by thunderbolt the mansions also fell, caught in fire.
6::75::19::As the mansions were burning, they shone like the peaks of Himalayas glowing at a distance.
6::75::20::While the tops of dwellings were burning, flames were blazing, and Lanka seemed adorned with Kimsuka blossoms.
6::75::21::In Lanka with the elephants set free, horses set free by the guards, it was like an agitated ocean at the end of the world cycle.
6::75::22::Some horses that were released, went in different directions afraid of elephants. Some elephants seeing horses ran away in fear.
6::75::23::While Lanka was burning its image reflected in the ocean made the ocean look like an ocean of red waters.
6::75::24::Set fire by the monkeys, in a short while, the city was like a land flaming out of dreadful destruction in the world.
6::75::25::By the smoke that spread, scorched by the fire, the clamour of the women folk at the top of their voice was heard at a hundred yojanas.
6::75::26::And thereafter the monkeys who were eager to fight assailed the Rakshasas who came out suddenly unable to bear the burning of the bodies.
6::75::27::The clamour of the monkeys and the sighing of the Rakshasas resounded in all the ten directions including the ocean as well as the earth.
6::75::28::The two great souls, Rama, and Lakshmana, both relieved of pain seized hold of excellent and wellknown bows.
6::75::29::Then Rama drew the best of bow, that created fear among the Rakshasas by its tumultuous sound.
6::75::30::Then, great Rama stretching his bow in great fury shone as though the divine Lord Siva was stretching his bow with imprints of Vedas.
6::75::31::That sound of the twang of Rama's bow could be heard very high over and above the sounds of the Vanaras and Rakshasas.
6::75::32::The sound of Rama's bow twang, the clamour of the Vanaras as well as the wailing of Rakshasas, all the three could be heard in all ten directions.
6::75::33::The entrance gate of Lanka, which was like Kailasa, crumbled and fell by the shaft released from the bow of Rama.
6::75::34::Seeing Rama's arrows on the highrise mansions and houses, the Rakshasa leaders started preparing for comb at out of fear.
6::75::35::As the Rakshasa leaders were preparing (for attack) and emitting leonine roar, night came upon like the night of Rudra (night of final dissolution).
6::75::36::Sugriva the great king of Vanaras commanded all the bulls among Vanaras, to encounter after reaching the gate of Lanka. He who is staying wherever they are does not obey the king's command will be killed for being guilty of flouting the command, ordered Sugriva to the Vanaras.
6::75::37::Holding burning torches in hand the Vanara chiefs reached and standing at the gate, saw that Ravana was overtaken by anger.
6::75::38::The ten directions were disturbed violently by his yawning and his wrath was perceptible like Rudra' s form in his limbs by his wrath.
6::75::39::Seized with anger, he sent for Kumbha and Nikumbha, both the sons of Kumbhakarna and many Rakshasas.
6::75::40::Yupaksha, Sonithaksha, Prajangha, Kampana set out with both the sons of Kumbhakarna.
6::75::41::Roaring like a lion, he ordered all the Rakshasas of extraordinary strength to proceed instantly.
6::75::42::Ordered by him again and again, the Rakshasa warriors went from Lanka with glowing weapons offering salutations to him.
6::75::43::The Rakshasas by the effulgence of ornaments and by themselves illumined all over the sky like monkeys did with torches.
6::75::44::There the radiance of the moon and stars and the splendour of their ornaments brightened the sky.
6::75::45::The moon light and the splendour of the ornaments, also the light of shining ocean and dwellings lit up the Vanara and Rakshasa armies.
6::75::46::There the waves of the ocean shone brightly getting united with the fire of half burnt houses.
6::75::47::Then the Rakshasa army appeared terrific, fixed with flags and poles, equipped with best of axes, horses yoked to formidable chariots and elephants different kinds of foot soldiers, distinguished by wielding shining tridents, maces, swords spears and lances warriors of frightening valour and prowess holding shining barbed missiles hundreds of tiny bells tied to the chariots and elephants making noise  warriors endowed with arms decorated with gold, with axes and weapons to pierce arrows fixed to the bows, with an abundance of fragrance.
6::75::48::Crowded with fierce warriors coming like thundering rainy clouds, the Rakshasas, and the monkey troops coming forward made loud noises with an elevated tone.
6::75::49::The great army of Rakshasas rushed towards the hostile army just as moths flew up towards flame.
6::75::50::Their Clubs and Asanis brandished by rubbing with their arms, the great army of Rakshasas appeared very bright.
6::75::51::Thereafter the monkeys eager to fight with night rangers rose as if gone mad striking the night rangers with trees and rocks.
6::75::52::When the Rakshasas showed up in that manner, the monkeys approaching them cut off their heads instantly with sharp swords.
6::75::53::The Rakshasas with ears bitten off by the teeth of the monkeys, skulls smashed with fists, and limbs broken with blows of rocks they moved about.
6::75::54::In the aforesaid manner the Vanaras struck more night rangers of terrific appearance, great heroes in front of them with sharp swords.
6::75::55::One struck another, who was striking the other. One threw down another who was throwing the other. One abused another reproaching contemptuously, and one bit his rival biting the other.
6::75::56::There they conversed this way with one another 'One said hit me and another one offered to hit,', again another intervened and said, 'Why are you crying?' meaning I offer resistance, one said 'Why are you suffering like this?'.
6::75::57::Highly enraged Vanaras and Rakshasas fought with them, raiment slipping, shields and weapons dodged, huge lances lifted to fight. They used fists, tridents, spears, and swords.
6::75::58::In that fight the Rakshasas killed the Vanaras at the rate of ten to seven and the Vanaras struck down Rakshasas at the rate of ten to seven.
6::75::59::The Vanaras surrounded the disturbed Rakshasas, whose hair was ripped off, raiment slipped off, shields and staff posts thrown.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामाणयेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेपञ्चसप्ततितमस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the seventy fifth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
