6::9::1::Then Nikumbha, Rshabha, mighty Suryasatru, Supthagna, Yagnaha raksha, Mahaparva, Mahodaro, Durdarsha, Agnikethu, Rasmikethu Rakshasas, Further Ravana's own son powerful Indrajith, Virupaksha and Prahasta, and mighty Rakshasas Vajradamshtra, Dumraaksha and also Durmukha of huge body holding iron bars, tridents, battle axes, bows and sharp arrows, very sharp swords, got up, highly enraged and all Rakshasas glowing like fire addressed Ravana.
6::9::2::Right now, we will kill Rama along with Lakshmana, Sugriva and vile Hanuman, on whose account Lanka was attacked.
6::9::3::With folded hands, Vibheeshana made all the (Rakshasas) wielding arms to stop and sit and addressed these words to Ravana.
6::9::4::Dear father, intelligent people say that an act which cannot be accomplished by the three means (Sama  Conciliation, Dana  Gift, Bheda  Sowing dissension), should only be accomplished diligently by one's heroic deed. Therefore, we should think of war only after the above three means are employed.
6::9::5::O Dear at those who are not alert, who are attacked by the enemy, and who are struck by fate, if you examine diligently according to prescribed method and perform deeds of heroic valour you will succeed.
6::9::6::How do you wish to overpower, him who is very attentive, bent on victory, mighty, steadfast, has subdued anger and unassailable?
6::9::7::Hanuman has crossed over the ocean, a Lord of streams and rivers and arrived. Who can ever know or think of such a task in this world?
6::9::8::Enemy's strength and valour is inestimable to relate. Do not disregard rashly, O Night ranger
6::9::9::What offence did Rama do earlier to the Rakshasa king that he abducted the glorious wife of Rama from Janasthana?
6::9::10::(It is true) Khara was killed by Rama in war as he acted beyond his limit. Certainly, living beings will have to protect their life with their own strength.
6::9::11::On account of this, we have a great fear of Vaidehi. She, who was brought here, is to be given away. What is the use of doing anything, which may be the cause of strife?
6::9::12::To have enmity with a valorous one, a follower of dharma, is useless and not good for us. Give away Mythili to him (Rama).
6::9::13::Before Rama comes with elephants and horses and tears with his arrows, this Lanka filled with abundance of gems, give away Mythili.
6::9::14::Lest the highly dreadful, formidable and huge Vanara troops surround all over Lanka. Give away Sita.
6::9::15::If Rama's dear wife is not given, this Lanka will be destroyed and also all Rakshasas.
6::9::16::I am requesting you because you are my relation (brother). Do as I said, as I am telling you for your welfare. Give away Sita.
6::9::17::You may restore Rama's Mythili, before the emperor Dasaratha's son sends forth solid unfailing arrows shining like autumnal Sun provided with fresh heads and shafts for killing you.
6::9::18::Give up that happiness and anger which destroys virtues. Seek pleasures that enhance fame. Be pacified. Live happily with sons and relatives restoring Mythili to Rama, the son of Dasaratha.
6::9::19::Having heard everything that was told by Vibheeshana, the Lord of Rakshasas sent away all and entered his palace.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेनवमस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the ninth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
