6::25::1::On hearing about Rama, the son of Dasaratha crossing the shore of the ocean along with the army, exuberant Ravana spoke to his ministers Suka and Saarana.
6::25::2::That all the Vanara army together with Rama have crossed the arduous ocean and that the construction of a bridge (is possible) in the sea is not known before.
6::25::3::It is not believable even to me that they constructed a bridge in the sea. Surely I wish to know the size of their army.
6::25::4::Both of you enter Vanara's army without their knowledge and know about the size of the army, of Rama and Sugriva's ministers, of army chiefs who are in the forefront, of the warriors, how they have built bridge in the middle of the sea, about the location of Vanaras and in the same way the efforts and valour of heroes Rama and Lakshmana, I ought to know truly.
6::25::5::Among those energetic Vanaras, who is the chief of the army? Knowing all these matters, it is fit for you to return quickly.
6::25::6::Having accepted the order, both the Rakshasa heroes, Suka and Saarana took the form of Vanaras and entered the Vanara army.
6::25::7::There upon both Suka and Saarana did not know the numbers (of the army) at that time as they could not count the numbers from there as it could not be conceived. It caused the raising of their hair.
6::25::8::The ocean of army settled on the mountain summits, in caverns and caves, on the shores of the ocean, in the forests and adjoining gardens some who crossed the sea some in the process of crossing settled all over was witnessed by the Rakshasas. It was never ending and making terrific noise.
6::25::9::Brilliant Vibheeshana saw both Suka and Saarana hidden in the army. He took hold of them and brought to the notice of Rama.
6::25::10::O conqueror of enemy's citadels! these are spies from Lanka, Suka and Saarana who have come to find us out.
6::25::11::The two (Rakshasa spies) got worried to look at Rama and also lost hope of their life. Caught up with fear they lifted their palms greeting Rama and expressed these words.
6::25::12::O noble one! We have come to you assigned by Ravana. O delight of Raghu race, thus we arrived here to know about the entire strength of your army.
6::25::13::On hearing (the spies) Dasaratha's son Rama who remains devoted to the wellbeing of all beings spoke these words smiling at both of them.
6::25::14::After observing our entire army carefully, acting appropriately (according to Ravana's words) and accomplishing your task you may freely return (said Rama to the spies).
6::25::15::If you have not seen even a bit, you ought to see. Or else Vibheeshana will show you the total army.
6::25::16::As you have been caught by us like this you need not have apprehension of your life. Those who do not possess wield or those who are envoys ought not to be slayed.
6::25::17::Vibheeshana! Even though they are spies seeking to divide the enemy army as both the night rangers have been requesting, you may set them free.
6::25::18::Upon entering the city of Lanka, you may tell my words to the king of Rakshasas, the younger brother of Kubera just as it was told by me.
6::25::19::Let him display the strength on which he has abducted my Sita along with his army and relations at his will.
6::25::20::At dawn tomorrow, you may see how I will crush the arches of the entrance of Lanka city and the strength of Rakshasas.
6::25::21::Tomorrow at the dawn of the day I will release my dreadful anger on Ravana and even on Rakshasas just as the thunderbolt of Indra was released on Rakshasas.
6::25::22::Having heard the reply of Rama, both the Rakshasas Suka and Saarana praising Rama saying, Victory to you! reached Lanka and said to the king of Rakshasas as follows.
6::25::23::O king of Rakshasas! Vibheeshana held us captive for slaying us. But righteous self, Rama, the highly effulgent one released us on seeing.
6::25::24::Exuberant Rama and Lakshmana, highly brilliant Vibheeshana, and Sugriva who resembles Indra in his valour, are like rulers of the world and are heroic, wielders of weapons and bulls among men. If all four of them come together there in that manner, they will unearth the arch ways and even the city of Lanka. They are capable even if the Vanaras are kept away.
6::25::25::If we see Rama's form and his weapon it is enough. He can alone slay even when all the other three keep away.
6::25::26::Even if Rama and Lakshmana are protected, and even Sugriva also, the entire army seems formidable like suras and asuras.
6::25::27::At this time, desiring war with those great Vanara heroes, the wanderers of woods, is not good. Their army is highly delighted to wage war. You may give away Mythili to Rama (said Suka and Saarana to Ravana).।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेपञ्चविंशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the twenty fifth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
