6::23::1::Perceiving the portents, Rama spoke these words embracing Saumithri who was aware of the portents.
6::23::2::Lakshmana Arrange a place in this forest where there is cool water and fruits for the battalions of the army, we shall remain (alert).
6::23::3::Dreadful warriors, Bears, monkeys, and Rakshasas will be slain, and I foresee that which bodes destruction of people.
6::23::4::The wind is blowing mixed with dust, even the earth is cracking, mountain tops are shaking, and huge trees are breaking and falling down.
6::23::5::Clouds resembling raw flesh in colour, are making harsh frightening sounds, and rain mixed with drops of blood.
6::23::6::The twilight in red sandal colour is very frightening. The Sun is blazing, raining masses of fire in variegated colours.
6::23::7::The wild animals all over have a piteous look and wailing in low tone standing opposite the Sun is indicating fear.
6::23::8::The moon devoid of glow even in the night is like the Sun with black rays around and red aura behind (the black).
6::23::9::Lakshmana the white Sun is appearing in copper colour around with black colour in the centre which had not been seen before. It is small and dreary.
6::23::10::Lakshmana the stars devoid of brightness are indicating as though it is the time of dissolution of the universe?
6::23::11::The crows, hawks and eagles are falling down like small animals. Also, the jackals are creating fear by making howls.
6::23::12::The earth will turn into a mass of flesh and blood and will be covered by the mountains and tridents hurled by Vanaras and Rakshasas.
6::23::13::All the Vanaras turning their direction will go immediately and now itself, swiftly to the city ruled by Ravana (said Rama to Lakshmana).
6::23::14::Rama, the subduer of enemies in war, a celebrated one having spoken this way proceeded towards Lanka going in front wielding a bow.
6::23::15::Then Vibheeshana, Sugriva and all bulls among Vanaras determined in the matter of slaying (the enemies) went roaring.
6::23::16::To make Rama happy, the excessively heroic Vanaras made monkey actions. Seeing that Rama felt happy.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेत्रयोविंशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the twenty third sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
