6::68::1::Seeing Kumbhakarna slain by the glorious Raghava, the Rakshasas informed Ravana, the king of Rakshasas.
6::68::2::O King! Kumbhakarna, who was equal to the God of Death, devoured and won over the Vanaras, scattered the army, has joined death as a consequence of time (fate).
6::68::3::Your brother Kumbhakarna showed his might for a short time. But by virtue of Rama's energy and arrows, his mountainlike body was reduced to a trunk of dreadful appearance. Bleeding excessively, he was like a mass submerged in an ocean of blood. like a tree caught in forest fire he was blocking the gate of Lanka in ugly form with a head, nose and ears chopped off.
6::68::4::Hearing that Kumbhakarna of great strength was slain, Ravana immersed in grief became deluded and fell.
6::68::5::Hearing about uncle's destruction, the sons of Ravana, Devanthaka, Naranthaka, Trisira and Atikaya, roared aloud afflicted by grief.
6::68::6::Ravana's brothers, Mahodara and Mahaparsva were overtaken by sorrow on hearing about the unwearied action of Rama and slaying of Kumbhakarna.
6::68::7::Thereafter the foremost of the Rakshasas regained consciousness with great difficulty and awakened to the situation of Kumbhakarna's destruction, wailed disturbed in mind.
6::68::8::Ha! Hero! Kumbhakarna! You, who crushed the pride of the enemy, endowed with great prowess have deserted me and gone to the abode of death, actually by divine will.
6::68::9::O Kumbhakarna of extraordinary might! You have tormented the enemy army singlehanded with valour. You are going alone leaving me and the kinsfolk.
6::68::10::I who depended on you like my right arm did not fear Devatas or Danavas and I am destroyed now.
6::68::11::You, who crushed the pride of Devas and Danavas are equal to timespirit and death at dissolution and being a hero, how did you die in the hands of Raghava?
6::68::12::You are never affected by the strike of thunderbolt. How are you sleeping on the ground hit by Rama's arrows?
6::68::13::These Devatas and all sages are standing in the sky, seeing the battle and laughing aloud seeing your destruction.
6::68::14::Having found an opportunity, all the Vanaras, highly rejoiced, on this very day, will surely climb over the gates of forts of Lanka determined.
6::68::15::I have no purpose with the kingdom. What will I do with Sita? I have lost my life and mind with Kumbhakarna's death.
6::68::16::If I do not kill Raghava who killed my brother in battle it is a waste of my life. Thus, thought Ravana.
6::68::17::This very day, this very minute I shall reach the region where my brother died, I have no interest in life.
6::68::18::Devatas who were harmed by me earlier will laugh at me now that Kumbhakarna is slain. How will I win Indra?
6::68::19::This calamity that has come upon me was because I have not taken such auspicious advice rendered by the great soul Vibheeshana.
6::68::20::Thus, loss of both Kumbhakarna and Prahastha is dreadful. It is because of not following the words of advice of Vibheeshana totally. It hurts me.
6::68::21::Righteous and prosperous Vibheeshana has been expelled by me earlier. By that action, I have obtained this grief.
6::68::22::﻿Thus, the ten-headed, Ravana saddened by the destruction of his brother, an enemy of Indra, the Rakshasa king lamented profusely in many ways grieving and fell down, his mind agitated deeply.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेआदिकाव्येश्रीमद्रामायणेयुद्धकाण्डेअष्टषष्टितमस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the sixtyeighth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana, composed by sage Valmiki.
