6::15::1::Thus spoke Indrajith, the great leader of the Rakshasa army, having heard the words spoken by the highly intelligent Vibheeshana who was equal to Brhaspathi in wisdom.
6::15::2::What a meaningless statement you made uncle, being frightened? One who is not born in our race also would not have said such unbecoming words uttered by you (nor do such unbecoming acts)?
6::15::3::In this race, alone younger father Vibheeshana is devoid of strength, valour, prowess, heroism, courage and boldness.
6::15::4::Those two sons of the king of men could be killed in war by an ordinary Rakshasa among us single handed. O timid one Why are you scaring us?
6::15::5::I have cast down on the ground, Indra, the Lord of gods and of three worlds. At one time all the gods in groups fled in all directions scared of me.
6::15::6::I pushed down the elephant Airavata coming towards me making noise, pulled down its tusks forcibly and chased the entire group of gods.
6::15::7::I am such a valiant one who crushed the arrogance of even the king of gods, Devendra. I can put even the Rakshasa leaders to grief. How is it not possible for me to do away the sons of kings who are ordinary human beings.
6::15::8::Vibheeshana, the best among wielders of weapons, spoke the following words of highly beneficial advice after hearing the words of dangerous Indrajith, the foremost of the warriors.
6::15::9::O dear  You have no capacity for decision making. You are young and not mature. Therefore, you are talking incoherently without any sense which is selfdestructive.
6::15::10::Indrajith Though you are calling yourself as the son of Ravana and pretending to be a friend, you are his foe. Even after hearing about the kind of destruction (of Ravana, his kingdom etc.) from Rama, out of delusion you are accepting (with Ravana).
6::15::11::You who are evil minded, deserve to be killed. The one who brought you here is young and loves you to make bold attempts. He is polluting your mind and deserves to be killed.
6::15::12::Indrajith You are foolish and boasting yourself. You lack obedience. You are wicked by nature, cruel, poor in intellect, extremely evil minded, ignorant and have spoken like a child.
6::15::13::Who can bear the arrows released by Rama in combat, which resembles the shaft of Brahma in splendour and flames of fire resembling death and equal to the shaft of the Lord of death?
6::15::14::O King We will offer celebrated Sita to Rama along with wealth, gems, good ornaments, wonderful and beautiful clothes and precious gems and remain here devoid of sorrow.।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेपञ्चदशस्सर्गः।।This is the end of the fifteenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic of the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
