6::77::1::Seeing his brother struck down by Sugriva, Nikumbha gazed at him as if to burn him in wrath.
6::77::2::Then the hero Nikumbha, girded with flowers measuring five digits in breadth, took an auspicious club like the peak of Mahendra mountain.
6::77::3::It was decked with a gold band, encrusted with diamonds and corals, in the form of Yama's rod, a fierce one which dispelled fear.
6::77::4::The club was highly splendorous and of terrific strength with the banner of Indra and Nikumbha took that club roared opening his mouth wide and pierced it with force.
6::77::5::Nikumbha was shining with ornaments on his chest, golden armlets on arms, wonderful earrings and wonderful garland s holding clubs in hand, with bow like Indra's and roaring like lightning and thunder in the clouds.
6::77::6::By Nikumbha whirling around the club and the conjunction of the seven winds coming in contact with the club in his hand crashed in space and glowed like a smokeless fire burst forth.
6::77::7::The heaven with the city of Vitapavati, including the excellent abodes of Gandharvas, the hosts of stars and mansions, the lunar abodes along with other planet abodes revolved round as though it was caused by the spinning of Nikumbha's club.
6::77::8::The glow of the club, the ornaments, and the fire of Nikumbha that burst forth was like the fire at the time of dissolution of the universe. It was formidable for the Vanaras to reflect on.
6::77::9::The Rakshasas and even Vanaras were not able to move out of fear. Only mighty Hanuman stood there showing his chest.
6::77::10::The Rakshasa, whose arms were like iron bars and shining like the Sun brought it down on the breast of mighty Hanuman.
6::77::11::As soon as the iron club touched the broad chest (of Hanuman), it split into a hundred splinters, in the sky and crumbled.
6::77::12::The great Vanara did not move and remained steady like a mountain in an earthquake with the iron club touching him.
6::77::13::Struck by the Rakshasa, Hanuman, the foremost of the monkeys of extraordinary strength clenched his fist violently.
6::77::14::Highly energetic champion endowed with speed, close to wind god in valour raising his fist instantly crushed Nikumbha on the chest.
6::77::15::Then Nikumbha's skin split, and blood started flowing, which appeared as though lightning had risen in the cloud.
6::77::16::By that blow, Nikumbha was not moved. Recovering from that he caught hold of Hanuman of extraordinary strength.
6::77::17::Then seeing Hanuman endowed with might, lifted by Nikumbha in the battlefield the residents of Lanka roared terribly.
6::77::18::Even while being carried by Rakshasa also, the son of the wind god hit Kumbhakarna's son with his hard adamant fist.
6::77::19::Hanuman, the son of wind god getting himself released from Nikumbha, springing up standing on the ground tormented Nikumbha.
6::77::20::Throwing down Nikumbha with great effort, Hanuman endowed with speed sprang up and fell on his chest.
6::77::21::Taking hold of the neck with both arms and twisting it round Hanuman broke off the neck of Nikumbha while he was crying terribly.
6::77::22::And thereafter as Nikumbha killed by windgod's son was crying aloud in the battlefield, a violent and fierce war took place between the highly disturbed son of Dasharatha and Rakshasa Makara.
6::77::23::When Nikumbha's life ceased, monkeys were happy, and their joy resounded in all quarters. Earth was shaken, the Rakshasa army was overtaken by fear and heaven appeared to crumble.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेसप्तसप्ततितमस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the seventy seventh sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
