6::84::1::As Lakshmana was comforting his affectionate brother, Vibheeshana came to Rama assigning the troops to reach their respective places.
6::84::2::Accompanied by the four ministers surrounded by four ministers resembling leaders of elephants, who looked dark like collyrium, Vibheeshana came to highsouled Rama. He witnessed Vanaras whose eyes were filled with tears.
6::84::3::He (Vibheeshana) saw the great soul, the delight of the Ikshvaku race deluded, distressed, and lying on the lap of Lakshmana.
6::84::4::Vibheeshana was pained to see Rama immersed in grief, depressed in spirit, and asked for What is all this grief for?
6::84::5::Lakshmana looking at Sugriva's face and also at the Vanaras, his eyes bathed in tears spoke in a dull tone.
6::84::6::O Noble one! On hearing Hanuman that Sita is killed by Indrajith, Rama is deluded', said Lakshmana to Vibheeshana.
6::84::7::Vibheeshana spoke these meaningful words to Rama, who was unconscious, restraining Saumithri from speaking.
6::84::8::I think that what has been spoken by Hanuman as truth (that Sita has been killed) is like drying up an ocean.
6::84::9::O mighty armed Rama! with reference to Sita, you do not know Ravana's opinion. He will never kill Sita.
6::84::10::Though I pleaded Ravana to return Vaidehi for his welfare, he did not accept my word.
6::84::11::She can't be perceived by recourse, by charity, by dissension or even by war. Why again any other means. There is no chance.
6::84::12::That Rakshasa by hoodwinking the Vanaras withdrew from the battlefield. O mighty armed one! Killing of Janaki is an illusion.
6::84::13::Ravana's son will be reaching a sanctuary named Nikumbhilam and doing a sacrificial ritual. On returning from there it will be difficult even for Indra and Devas to be at him in war. He has done this conjuring trick.
6::84::14::Knowing the prowess of Vanaras, thinking surely that they will create obstacles for the ritual, he used the trick to keep them away (to be sad and not inclined for war).
6::84::15::O tiger among men! We shall go there with the army before the completion of the sacrificial ritual. Give up false agony and the cause of sorrow. Seeing you all the troops are distressed.
6::84::16::You be confident at heart and be courageous now. Send Lakshmana with us with the army.
6::84::17::The tiger among mortals with his sharp arrows will dispel Ravana's son from doing the action (sacrifice) then killing him will be possible.
6::84::18::Those whetted and pointed arrows fixed with limbs of birds in the form of feathers will drink his (Indrajith's) blood like cruel birds.
6::84::19::O mighty armed Rama! send Lakshmana endowed with auspicious qualities for the destruction of Rakshasa like Indra with thunderbolt, conveyed Vibheeshana.
6::84::20::O Jewel among men, wasting time in case of destruction of the enemy is not desirable. Just like the Lord of gods sent to kill the enemy of gods, you command Lakshmana to kill the enemy.
6::84::21::On completion of the sacrifice by the Rakshasa he will become invisible for Suras and Asuras also in war. After completion even the Suras will have great doubt to come to fight with him.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेअदिकव्येयुद्धकाण्डेचतुरशीतितमस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the eighty fourth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
