6::10::1::ततः thereafter, प्राप्तधर्मार्थनिश्चयः determined to relate about righteous and material gains, भीमकर्मा: of fierce task, विभीषणः Vibheeshana, प्रत्युषसि: when morning Sun, प्राप्ते: rose, राक्षसाधिपतेः Lord of Rakshasas, वेश्म: residence.
6::10::2::शैलाग्रचयसङ्काशं: like a lofty mountain top with many peaks, शैलशृङ्गमिव: like a summit of a mountain, उन्नतम् supreme, सुविभक्तमहाकक्षम् divided into many spacious sections, महाजनपरिग्रहम् surrounded by many people.
6::10::3::मतिमद्भि: wise ones, अनुरक्तै: devoted to their Lord, महामात्रैः great ministers, अधिष्ठितम् commanded by, आप्तपर्याप्तै: competent and trustworthy, राक्षसैः Rakshasas, सर्वतः everywhere, परिरक्षितम् well protected.
6::10::4::मत्तमातङ्गनिश्श्वासैः elephants in rut breathing heavily, व्याकुलीकृतमरुतम् filled by tempestuous wind, शङ्खघोषमहाघोषम् echoed by the sound of blowing conchs of the early morning, तूर्यनादानुनादितम् filled with the sounds of drums and trumpets.
6::10::5::प्रमदाजनसम्बाधम् filled with women, प्रजल्पितमहापथम् royal path filled with the prattling sounds of gossiping, तप्तकाञ्चननिर्यूहम् shining golden passages, भूषणोत्तमभूषितम् decorated with the best of ornaments.
6::10::6::गन्धर्वाणाम् of Gandharvas, आवासम् इव: like the abode, मरुतामिव: of the wind god, आलयम् abode, रत्नसञ्चयसम्बाधम् abounding in the collection of precious gems, भोगिनाम् indulging in enjoyment like Nagas, भवनम् इव: like mansion.
6::10::7::महाद्युतिः one of exceptional splendour, वीरः heroic, तेजो: brilliant विस्तृतरश्मिमान् one whose radiance was spread widely, आदित्यः Sun, महाभ्रमिव: highly lustrous, अग्रजस्य: brother's, तम् आलयम् that abode, प्रविवेश: entered.
6::10::8::सुमहातेजाः highly effulgent, भ्रातुः for brother, विजयसंश्रितान् desiring propitious day, वेदविद्भि: who are learned in the Vedas, उदाहृतान् uttering, पुण्यान् sacred, पुण्याहघोषान् sounds of sacred mantras, शुश्रावच: heard.
6::10::9::महाबलः mighty, सः he, दधिपात्रैश्च: pots of curd, सर्पिर्भिः clarified butter, सुमनोक्षतैः with yellow rice, पूजितान् worshipped by, मन्त्रवेदविदः learned in vedas and mantras, विप्रान् by brahmins, ददर्श: saw.
6::10::10::रक्षोभिः by Rakshasas, पूज्यमानः one who is revered, महाबाहुः one with broad shoulders, सः that Ravana, स्वतेजसा: self brilliance, दीप्यमानम् shining, आसनस्थम् seated on his chair, धनदानुजम् brother of Kubera, ववन्दे: greeted with folded palms.
6::10::11::आचारकोविदः learned in traditions, सः that Vibheeshana, समुदाचारम् wellversed in the code of conduct, प्रयुज्यराजदृष्टिसम्पन्नम् blessed by the glance of the king, हेमभूषितम् decorated with gold, आसनम् seat, जगाम: reached.
6::10::12::सः he, Vibheeshana, विजने: when none were there, मन्त्रिसन्निधौ: in the presence of ministers, महात्मानम् distinguished one, रावणम् at Ravana, हेतुनिश्चितम् wishing the welfare decidedly, अत्यर्थम् meaningful, हितम् advice, वचनम् words, उवाच: spoke.
6::10::13::दृष्टलोकपरावरः one who knew good and bad of the world, सान्त्वेन: in appeasing way, ज्येष्ठंभ्रातरं: to elder brother, प्रसाद्य: propitiated, उपस्थितक्रमः observing the customary traditions, देशकालार्थसंवादि: one who knows the time and place of advice.
6::10::14::इमांपुरीं: this city, वैदेही: Vaidehi, यदाप्रभृतिइह: since she has come here, सम्प्राप्ता: observed, तदाप्रभृति: such signs are observed, नः by us, अशुभानि: inauspicious, निमित्तानि: happenings, दृश्यन्ते: are seen.
6::10::15::मन्त्रसङ्घहुतःअपि: even the fire sacrifices, अग्निः fire, सस्फुलिङ्गः with fire particles, सधूमार्चिः with smoke, सधूमकलुषोदयः mixed with smoke, सम्यक् well, नाभिवर्धते: not burning with brilliance.
6::10::16::अग्निष्ठेषु: in cooking fire, अग्निशालासु: in places of fire sacrifice, तथा: so also, ब्रह्मस्थलीषुच: at places where offerings are made into fire, सरीसृपाणि: serpents, दृश्यन्ते: are seen, हव्येषु: in the Havis, पिपीलिकाः ants are seen.
6::10::17::गवाम् of cows, पयांसि: udder, स्कन्नानि: dried up, वीरकुञ्जराः proud elephants, विमदामः lost their ichor, अश्वाः horses, दीनम् pa the tic, प्रहेषन्ते: neighing, ग्रासाभिनन्दिनः interested in fodder, नच: even not.
6::10::18::राजन् O king, खरोष्ट्रातराः donkeys and camels, भिन्नरोमाः shed their body hair, स्रवन्तिच: crying, विधानैः different kinds, चिन्तिताःअपि: even though treated for, स्वभावे: natural form, नअवतिष्ठन्ति: not getting to be normal.
6::10::19::क्रूराः wild, वायसाः crows, सङ्घश: in flocks, समन्ततः all over, व्याहरन्ति: sounding harsh, विमानाग्रेषु: on the top of aerial chariot, सङ्घशः gathered, समवेताः in groups, दृश्यन्ते: are seen.
6::10::20::गृध्राश्च: even eagles, पुरीमुपरि: over the houses of the capital, पिण्डिताः collected, परिलीयन्ते: repeatedly standing, शिवाः auspicious, द्वेसन्ध्ये: in both morning and evening twilight time, उपपन्नाः coming together, अशिवम् inauspicious, व्याहरन्ति: sounding.
6::10::21::पुरिद्वारेषु: at the entrance of capital, सङ्घशः collected, क्रव्यादानाम् carnivorous, मृगाणाम् animals, सविस्फूर्जिन्तिस्स्वनाः like thunderous sounds, विपुलाः loud, घोषाः noise, श्रूयन्ते: heard.
6::10::22::यदि: such being, तत् that, एवम् in that way, प्रस्तुते: commenced, कार्ये: task (of burning Lanka), इदम् this is, क्षमम् appropriate, प्रायश्चित्तम् atonement, रोचते: I have thought, वैदेही: Vaidehi, राघवाय: to Rama, प्रदीयताम् restore.
6::10::23::महाराज: O great king, इदम् this is, मयामोहाद्वा: by my delusion, लोभाद्वा: or greed, व्याहृतंयदि: telling like that, तत्रापि: you ought, दोषम् fault, कर्तुम् finding, नार्हसि: you may know.
6::10::24::आयम् This, दोषः offence, रक्षसाम् for all Rakshasas, राक्षसीनांच: for Rakshasa women also, पुरस्य: of the capital, अन्तःपुरस्यच: even those in the harem, अस्य: there, सर्वस्य: to all, जनस्य: common people, उपलक्ष्यतेहि: are aware of.
6::10::25::अस्य: your, मन्त्रस्य: ministers', श्रावणे: in order to make you hear, सर्वमन्त्रिणः all ministers, निवृत्ताः abstained from, यत् that which, दृष्टम् is seen, अपिवा: and also, श्रुतम् that which is heard, मया: my, अवश्यम् necessarily, वाच्यम् these words, तत् that, भवान् to you, यथान्यायम् that which is justifiable, सम्विधाय: determining the propriety, कर्तुम् I submit, अर्हति: is proper for me.
6::10::26::भ्राता: brother, विभीषण: Vibheeshana, स्ममन्त्रिणाम् in the presence of his ministers, भ्रातरम् brother, राक्षसां: among Rakshasas, श्रेष्ठम् eminent, रावणम् to Ravana, इति: thus, पथ्यम् beneficial, एतत् all this, ऊचिवान् tendered advice.
6::10::27::प्रसङ्गवान् words of counsel, हितम् welfare, महार्थम् very meaningful, मृदु: gentle, हेतुसंहितम् that which was full of benefit, व्यतीतकालायतिसम्प्रतिक्षमम् that which is beneficial for the past, present and future also, तत् such, वाक्यम् statement, निशम्य: foregoing, उपस्थितज्वरः seized with anger, एतत् this manner, उत्तरम् replied, अब्रवीत् spoke.
6::10::28::अहम् I am, कुतश्चिदपि: of anyone, भयम् fear, नपश्यामि: do not perceive, राघवः Rama, जातु: at any time, मैथिलीम् Mythili, नप्राप्स्यति: will not get, सहेन्द्रेः with Indra, सुरैरपि: with Suras, लक्ष्मणाग्रजः Lakshmana's elder brother, सङ्गरे: in battle, मम: with me, अग्रज: elder brother, कथम् how can, स्थास्यति: withstand.
6::10::29::सुरसैन्यनाशनः one who is a destroyer of Devatas army, महाबलः mighty, संयति in war, चण्डविक्रमः of formidable valour, दशाननः tenheaded, इत्येवम् in this way, उक्त्वा: having spoken, आप्तवादिनम् one who gave good advice, विभीषणम् Vibheeshana, तदा: then, विसर्जयामास: sent him away.
