6::4::1::Glorious Rama, of truthful valour, having heard Hanuman in the aforesaid manner, there after spoke (to Hanuman).
6::4::2::I will destroy immediately that Lanka of fierce rakshasa, you are telling. I am telling you, this is the truth.
6::4::3::I desire to journey at this opportune time. The Sun has reached the mid position and so a good time for victory. 
6::4::4::Where can the one who has abducted Sita go from here? Just as one who has drunk the poison gets some life sometimes on tasting the nectar of immortality, Sita will attain the desire to live on hearing about my approaching.
6::4::5::Today Uttaraphalguni constellation is on the ascent and for me born in Punarvasu star, Hasta, will be in conjunction with the moon. Sugriva You may assemble all the army as I desire to start the journey (as it is auspicious for me). 
6::4::6::I also see manifestations of good omens to start (the journey). I shall get Janaka's daughter Sita on killing Ravana.
6::4::7::My upper eyelids are twitching thus indicating victory and it strikes me that my desire will be fulfilled.
6::4::8::There after righteous Rama who is well respected by the king of vanaras and also by Lakshmana, who is wellversed in polity once again spoke.  
6::4::9::Let Nila go leading in front with his courageous and hundred thousand army looking at the way (said Rama).
6::4::10::O Nila, the chief of the army Go fast with the army along the way which has plenty of fruits and roots, shady forests and cool water and sweet smelling honey.
6::4::11::Evilminded one, the lord of rakshasas will spoil the roots, fruits and water (on the way). Be ever alert and protect them.
6::4::12::O Vanaras You should even look for (the rakshasas) in the low lying lands, in inaccessible water sources, in forests and also beyond sight leaping up to the sky. 
6::4::13::If there are any weak ones in the army, they may be used here for this purpose (of looking for fruits etc.). Our task (ahead) is a terrific one and be prepared to overcome your power.  
6::4::14::These hundreds and thousands of lionlike vanaras would walk in groups leading the army like the fierce tides of the ocean.
6::4::15::Gaja who is like a mountain in form, Gavaya, the mighty strong and Gavaksha would go like proud bulls that lead the cows.
6::4::16::Let the vanara called Rshaba the foremost among the leaping vanaras, take charge of the right side of the army.
6::4::17::Let Gandhamadana, the unassailable and powerful vanara resembling the elephant in rut take charge of the left portion of the army.
6::4::18::Like the lord of gods riding on Iravatam I would mount on Hanuman and reach the centre of the army encouraging the army.
6::4::19::Let Lakshmana who is like Anthaka (one who excels death) ride on Angada, like the lord of wealth (Kubera) rides on the elephant Saarvabhauma (the elephant that guards the four quarters).
6::4::20::Let Rksharaja the mighty strong Jambavan and Sushena even Vegadarsi protect the rear side (of the army).
6::4::21::Sugriva the bull among vanaras having heard the words of Raghava ordered the heroic vanaras (to start).
6::4::22::Then all the heroic monkeys who were eager for combat jumped down from the caves, mountain peaks and trees.
6::4::23::Thereafter righteous Rama who was worshipped by the king of vanaras and Lakshmana went towards the southern direction.
6::4::24::Protected by hundreds and thousands, even crores of vanaras and surrounded by a myriad of vanaras Rama went.
6::4::25::While Rama was walking the great army of vanaras controlled by Sugriva followed him with great delight.
6::4::26::The monkeys went towards southern direction playing, leaping, running and roaring like lions. 
6::4::27::The monkeys went eating sweet smelling honey and fruits and carrying branches of huge trees having bunches of blossoms.
6::4::28::Some wild monkeys carried one another, while some fell, knocked down others, some lifted up and some turned their back and pushed down others.
6::4::29::'We should kill all the rakshasas and Ravana', saying so the vanaras close by Rama were roaring.
6::4::30::Heroic Rshaba, Nila and even Kumuda together with many vanaras were searching on the way.
6::4::31::Sugriva, Rama and Lakshmana marched in the middle surrounded by powerful and fierce vanaras who can destroy the enemy. 
6::4::32::Sathavali alone encircled by hundred crore vanara heroes was protecting the army of vanaras.
6::4::33::Kesari, Panasa, Gaja, Atibala, Arka and their army of one hundred crores were protecting the army on one side.
6::4::34::Sushena, and Jambavan surrounded by the army of Rshaba were guarding by placing on the western side.
6::4::35::Nila, the heroic chief of the army who was foremost in the act of flying and descending was going around and controlling.
6::4::36::Valiant Darimukha, Prajhanga, Rambha and Rabhasa went about jumping cheering all vanaras.
6::4::37::Those vanaras who were tigers among vanaras, proud of their might went to see (on their way) the Sahya Mountains, the foremost of the mountains with trees and creepers, lakes and ponds with fully blossomed lotuses.
6::4::38::The dreadful vanara army expansive as the ocean went knowing about the fear of Rama's wrath. They went avoiding parts of cities and villages making frightening sounds like the great sound of the waves of the ocean.
6::4::39::The heroic and best of the monkeys galloped swiftly on the command of Dasaratha's son like horses that are driven like the steeds.
6::4::40::When Rama and Lakshmana, the best among men were borne by Hanuman and Angada they were shining like the planets Jupiter and Venus conjoined with Sun and Moon.
6::4::41::Then righteous Rama who is worshipped by the king of vanaras and by Lakshmana went with the army towards the southern direction.
6::4::42::Lakshmana, who was borne by Angada, has a good memory and sense of intuition. Set to accomplish his desire fully, he spoke to Rama these auspicious words.
6::4::43::Rama After killing Ravana and attaining the desired object of recovering Vaidehi you would go to Ayodhya having accomplished your objective.  
6::4::44::Raghava I am seeing good signs in the sky and also on land indicating auspicious signs of the accomplishment of your desire. The wind is also favourable and agreeable to the moving army.
6::4::45::The sounds of these animals and birds are very sweet. The directions are pleasing, and the Sun is shining brightly.
6::4::46::Bhargava who is the master of all knowledge and Sukra, the regent of planet Venus shines brightly behind you. The seven sages who are pure and glowing like fire in brilliance are going round Dhruva. 
6::4::47::Among the great kings of the Ikshvaku dynasty, the grandfather Trisanku who is a royal sage shines clearly along with Vasishta the foremost priest.
6::4::48::The best of stars, Visakha of the highsouled Ikshvakus which is unconnected shines brightly.
6::4::49::The star called Niruta (of rakshasas) in the southwest is highly tormented by the touch of the Mula star (close to it) and is oppressed.
6::4::50::Everything has sprung up for the destruction of rakshasas. Those that are caught up by death will be oppressed at the time of death.
6::4::51::The water is pure and of good taste. The forests are filled with fruits. The wind with fragrance is not blowing excessively or violently. The trees are in bloom beyond season.
6::4::52::O King This army of vanaras placed in order is like the forces of gods in their battle with Taraka (a rakshasa who was killed in a battle by Karthikeya) and shines very much. O king, reviewing these (arrangements of army) you ought to be pleased (said Lakshmana to Rama).  
6::4::53::Saumithri reassured his brother who was surrounded by the vanara force saying that those vanaras who use their nails and teeth as weapons and tigerlike bears spread all over the expansive land are proceeding.
6::4::54::The terrible dust risen up by the (stamping) legs and hands of the vanara troops spread all over is keeping off Sun's radiance as if creating fear.Alas, the frightening army of vanaras went spreading all over the mountains and forests like the spread of clouds over the sky.
6::4::55::When the army was continuously crossing the river, later (after they crossed) the water flowed excessively like flood.
6::4::56::The vanaras went through the pellucid waters of the centre of the lakes. They went obliquely at the mountains, walked on plain lands and underneath trees filled with fruits, plucking them and eating. 
6::4::57::The great vanara army spread all over the land went with the swiftness of wind with cheerful faces.
6::4::58::For the purpose of Rama, the vanaras went showing their valour, happiness and prowess charged with emotion towards one another on the way. They showed their joy and spirit to one another exhibiting their natural youthful enthusiasm, arrogance and several other gestures.
6::4::59::Being vanaras some went swiftly, some jumped, and some others made sound 'kila kila'(the usual sounds of monkeys) while they went. 
6::4::60::Some hit their tails on the ground, some stamped their feet on the ground, some crushed the mountains with their arms and some broke the trees.
6::4::61::Vanaras, being the inhabitants of mountains, climbed on peaks of mountains and made loud noises like snapping and roaring like lions. Some went round and round.
6::4::62::With the speed of their shaking thighs, the vanaras broke several meshes of creepers. While yawning also some showed their courage by whirling round and throwing stones and trees.
6::4::63::Formidable vanaras in hundreds, thousands, lakhs and crores spread in a splendid manner around the land.
6::4::64::The mighty vanara force protected by Sugriva from all sides cheerful at heart, walked day and night speedily. Being eager to somehow liberate Sita they were happy about war and stood nowhere for a while.
6::4::65::Thereafter having reached the dense forest filled with trees surrounded by the Malaya and Sahaya Mountain inhabited by different kinds of animals, the vanaras assembled. 
6::4::66::Rama too went to see the wonderful woods and streams of rivers of Sahaya mountain.
6::4::67::The vanaras went adoring the Vakula, Tilaka, Mango, Asoka, Tinisa, Sinduvara and Karaveera trees.
6::4::68::Vanaras went adoring the Ankola, Karanja, Plaksa, Nyagrodha, Jambu,Amla and neepa trees.
6::4::69::Many kinds of trees standing on beautiful rocks and of the forest shaken by the fury of the wind showered their flowers on the vanaras.
6::4::70::As the bees humming in delight were spreading the sweet fragrance of honey accompanied the breeze that blew, it was cool like the cool touch of sandal (to the vanaras).
6::4::71::That lord of mountains richly adorned with minerals shone very brightly. The mineral particles raised by the stamping of the vanara troops covered the huge vanaras all over.
6::4::72::In the mountain ranges were well blossomed trees  such as Kethaka, Sinduvaara and Mango trees Manorama, Madhavi, Kunda, Gulma creepers filled with blossoms of fragrance Chiribilva, Madhuka like wild trees,Vajula,Vakula ,Ranjaka, Tilaka,Kuruvaka, Naga trees Patalaya trees trees with red flowers Arjuna, Simsupa trees with white flowers Kutaja, Dhava and Salmala, Red Kurana, Hinthala,Tinisa,and Churanaka trees, so also dark flowered Asoka trees, Pine trees, Ankola and Padmaka trees were convenient for the monkeys to shake and jump.
6::4::73::In the mountains were reservoirs of water and ponds with cool water inhabited by flocks of Chakravaka birds, water birds like ravens and Krauncha birds. The woodlands were terrific, frequented by boars, bears, hyenas, lions and frightening tigers and many kinds of wild elephants. With flowers in full bloom, the white, blue and red lotuses in the lakes were delightful.
6::4::74::At that time different kinds of flocks of birds were singing in the mountain ranges. The vanaras after having taken their bath were drinking and sporting with water with each other (pouring water over another) climbing up the mountain.
6::4::75::Then the vanaras who were deluded with pride climbed the trees and ate the fruits with nectar like aroma, roots and flowers.
6::4::76::The tawnyeyed monkeys went joyfully drinking the honey from the large honeycombs hanging there.
6::4::77::The vanaras (who are best among leaping animals) went smashing the trees, pulling out the creepers and purposefully destroying the mountains (on their way). 
6::4::78::While some monkeys that were intoxicated by drinking excessive honey walked where there were no trees, others climbed the tree tops and jumped.
6::4::79::That land filled completely with the vanara heroes seemed like a fully ripe paddy field.
6::4::80::At that time Lotuseyed Rama of mighty shoulders climbed up the the top of mountain Mahendra adorned with beautiful trees.
6::4::81::Then Rama the son of Dasaratha on climbing to the top (of Mahendra mountain) observed the ocean inhabited by tortoises and fish. 
6::4::82::The vanaras crossing over the great Sahya and Malaya mountains one after another reached near the frightening ocean. 
6::4::83::Rama, who causes delight to others, got down (the mountain) along with Lakshmana and Sugriva and soon reached the wood on the sea coast.
6::4::84::Atonce Rama sprung from there (top of mountain) on to an extensive surface of the earth polished by the waves of the ocean spoke these words on reaching there. 
6::4::85::Sugriva We have reached the ocean and now we have to think of that idea now, which we thought of earlier.
6::4::86::There is only the ocean, the lord of rivers, and the shore is beyond this. We cannot cross the ocean without any mode.
6::4::87::We will have to leave the army of vanaras here itself. We have to deliberate how to get the vanaras to the other shore.
6::4::88::On seeing the ocean, the mightyarmed Rama, tormented by the abduction of Sita in that way, ordered about the quartering of the vanaras.
6::4::89::O Best of monkeys Now make preparation for all the army to reside at the sea coast. The time to deliberate about crossing the ocean has set in.
6::4::90::None of the army should go wherever leaving the parasol. The vanara warriors should keep guarding and you may know that it is dangerous. 
6::4::91::Having heard Rama's words, Sugriva and Lakshmana made the army to reside on the sea shore filled with trees.
6::4::92::That vast (sea of) army of monkeys in tawny colour (settled) at the proximity of the sea (that was white) seemed like a prosperous second sea in bright colour. 
6::4::93::Then the heroic monkeys having arrived at the forest close to the ocean stood there desiring to reach the other shore.
6::4::94::The noise of the ocean was drowned by the great sound produced by the assembly of the army quartered there.
6::4::95::The three army groups of vanaras protected by Sugriva encamped for the purpose of Rama appeared enthusiastic. 
6::4::96::Having arrived at the great ocean and seeing the ocean lashed by the fury of the wind the vanaras felt rejoiced.
6::4::97::On seeing the expansive ocean, the vanara army thought 'how to cross the abode of rain god whose shores are far away and not connected and is protected by rakshasas'?  
6::4::98::As the day was ending and night was setting in, the ocean filled with crocodiles which could catch any animal looked terrific and its waves seemed as if it were laughing and dancing. 
6::4::99::At the time of the moon rise, the lofty ocean inhabited by dark swift crocodiles, huge Timingala fish scattered in it was rising up with several images of moon reflected in its water. 
6::4::100::Filled with serpents glowing with flaming gems on hoods, the abode of Varuna (was like underworld) with huge snakes and different mountains under water is a difficult path inaccessible and a fathomless abode of rakshasas (vanaras thought).  
6::4::101::Swarmed with sea animals like sharks and crocodiles and serpents were jumping with huge volumes of water rising and down with force by the stormy wind.
6::4::102::The sea that was the domain of snakes was shining as though sparks of fire from the sky penetrated the drops of sea water.
6::4::103::The ocean resembled the sky and the sky like the ocean were identical as no difference appeared. 
6::4::104::The ocean and the sky filled with gems and stars respectively appeared alike.
6::4::105::There was no distinction between the sky with rising clouds and the ocean with moving waves.  
6::4::106::The waves of the ocean striking each other making frightening sounds like the blowing of war horns seemed as if challenging each other.
6::4::107::The enthusiastic vanaras saw the sea inhabited by animals filled with gems and water concentrated in one place rising to the sky, as though infuriated. The rising of the waves (the noise) of the ocean by the cause of wind seemed as if they were talking about. 
6::4::108::The vanaras were wonder struck when they saw the ocean that was noisy with rolling waves as if it was highly agitated and distressed.।।इत्यार्षे वाल्मीकीये श्रीमद्रामायणे आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे चतुर्थस्सर्गः।।This is the end of the fourth Sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
