6::97::1::That time the battlefield was strewn with bodies of Vanaras whose limbs had been severed by the arrows of Ravana.
6::97::2::Just as moths cannot bear the blazing fire, the Vanaras could not bear the glowing hail of Ravana's arrows even for an instant.
6::97::3::Tormented by sharp arrows, the scorched Vanaras fled screaming like elephants enveloped in flames.
6::97::4::At that time, driven by Ravana's arrows, the Vanaras fled from the battlefield just like huge clouds are dissipated by wind.
6::97::5::The Rakshasa king, having destroyed the forest rangers, thereafter, went to Raghava hurriedly.
6::97::6::Seeing the defeated and broken monkeys, Sugriva assigned Sushena for their protection and went to the battle making others wonder at his wonderful action.
6::97::7::Sugriva, being a hero himself, uprooting a tree as a weapon, went towards the enemy after having assigned Sushena the responsibility of protection of Vanaras.
6::97::8::All the leaders of the army themselves seizing hold of huge mountains and trees of several kinds followed his side.
6::97::9::Great Sugriva roaring at high pitch in war destroyed several other Rakshasas and went towards the best of Rakshasas.
6::97::10::The Vanara Lord of gigantic body, moving like the wind, tortuously destroyed the Rakshasas like a huge wind destroying the universe.
6::97::11::Just as clouds shower hail stones on flocks of birds in the forest, Sugriva rained showers of rocks on the Rakshasas.
6::97::12::Hit by the rocks rained by the Vanara king, the Rakshasas with heads broken and body mutilated had fallen like mountains.
6::97::13::And thereafter, all the Rakshasas shattered by Sugriva, tormented, fallen on the ground were shouting. Seeing that Virupaksha, himself, who is difficult to encounter, holding his bow, announcing his name, jumped from the chariot onto an elephant in a rut.
6::97::14::That great charioteer Virupaksha ascended the elephant, frightening like a lion, and rushed towards Vanaras roaring.
6::97::15::Releasing arrows at the army of Vanaras and Sugriva, he (Virupaksha) pierced arrows and relieved the Rakshasas of fear and made them happy.
6::97::16::The king of Vanaras, pained by the shafts of Rakshasa, roared, and became very furious. He set in his mind to kill the Rakshasa.
6::97::17::Then springing up, the valiant Vanara uprooting a tree struck the face of the Rakshasa seated on the great elephant.
6::97::18::Overwhelmed by the blow of Sugriva, that great elephant retreated four cubits, distressed, and roared.
6::97::19::That valiant Rakshasa hero jumped down quickly from the wounded elephant, seizing hold of a shield made of bull's hide and a sword, advancing towards the enemy who stood firmly, and facing him, as if threatening him.
6::97::20::Holding a huge rock which was like a mass of clouds, Sugriva, who was very angry, hurled at Virupaksha.
6::97::21::Then that exceedingly powerful Rakshasa leader, seeing the rock falling, struck it with a sword, jumping.
6::97::22::Struck by the mighty Rakshasa with a sword, the Vanara leader, a heroic one, got wounded, and became unconscious for a while.
6::97::23::Then in that great war, Sugriva getting up at once whirling his fist, hit (Virupaksha) him on the chest.
6::97::24::Hit by the fist, Virupaksha became very angry and tore the armor of Sugriva by his sword in the forefront of the army. Wounded severely, Sugriva fell on his feet.
6::97::25::Dropped down by him (Virupaksha), Sugriva, got up, and gave the Rakshasa a slap with his palm which was equal to thunderbolt that produced a terrific sound like crash.
6::97::26::Virupaksha, escaping the slap of Sugriva with great skill, hit him (Sugriva) on the chest with his fist.
6::97::27::Then Sugriva, the king of the forest, grew angry and hit the Rakshasa on the forehead.
6::97::28::The Vanara, seeing the blow given by Virupaksha, enraged Sugriva hit him with another palm on the temporal bone by which he fell.
6::97::29::Hurt by the palm which resembled Indra's weapon, blood started flowing from Virupaksha's body just like water flowed from waterfalls. Bathed in blood, vomiting blood, Virupaksha fell on the ground.
6::97::30::The Vanaras witnessed Virupaksha who had misshapen eyes, turning his eyeballs in anger, foaming blood flowing from nostrils.
6::97::31::Virupaksha rolled, by changing sides bathed in blood, causing sorrow and compassion to Vanaras who witnessed.
6::97::32::Thus, both close to each other, both redoubtable armies, of Vanaras and Rakshasas, both powerful and terrific, both mighty, roared as if the great ocean had burst.
6::97::33::Looking at the most powerful Virupaksha destroyed by Sugriva, the Vanaras were happy and the Rakshasa army in sorrow seemed mad like Ganga in space.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेसप्तनवतितमस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the ninety seventh sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
