6::59::1::Commander in chief of the Rakshasa army killed by Neela, the bull of Vanaras, the army Rakshasas with dreadful weapons which were like the fury of an ocean, ran.
6::59::2::Having gone to the king of Rakshasas, the survivors said, Prahastha is killed by the son of fire god. Thereafter, the king of Rakshasas fell prey to anger.
6::59::3::Even as Rakshasas revealed about Prahastha's death, tormented by grief and anger Ravana spoke to Rakshasa troops just as Indra spoke to celestial troops.
6::59::4::No low opinion to be entertained with regard to an enemy by whom my commander in chief of the army was killed, who is capable of killing the army of Indra with his followers and elephants.
6::59::5::I shall go myself without thinking to that wonderful battle scene and put an end to the enemy and succeed.
6::59::6::Now I will go and burn up that army of Vanaras along with Lakshmana and Rama with the stream of my arrows just as forest fire without the use of fire.
6::59::7::Ravana, the enemy of the king of Devatas, having spoken like that ascended a chariot yoked to the best of horses, shining by virtue of its form (golden) and luminous like fire.
6::59::8::As the foremost king of the Rakshasas went forth, a blast of sounds of conchs, beat of drums and clapping of arms and the roaring sounds followed by the chanting of auspicious verses sung by the Rakshasas eulogizing and honouring the king highly.
6::59::9::The Rakshasa king surrounded by Rakshasas who resembled mountains and clouds in form seemed like Rudra surrounded by asuras.
6::59::10::Thereafter, Ravana possessed with great splendour stopped at the city and saw the army of Vanaras collected together looking like an ocean of clouds wielding trees and rocks.
6::59::11::Rama, whose arms were like the king of serpents, shining with splendour, followed by army, seeing the army of Rakshasas exceedingly furious, spoke to Vibheeshana the foremost of the wielder of weapons.
6::59::12::Under whose command is this unshakeable army with several kinds of flags, posts and weapons armed with missiles, tridents, swords spikes and darts, with elephants the size of Mahendra mountain
6::59::13::Thereupon, Vibheeshana, equal to Indra in valour, on hearing the great soul Rama, revealed about the Rakshasa army endowed with great strength.
6::59::14::O King! the one seated on the elephant, by whose weight the elephant head is shaking, whose coppery face is like the rising sun, a gigantic one is Akampana.
6::59::15::The one on the chariot, distinguished by the sign of a lion, and making sound with his bow, splendid as Indra's bow with terrific teeth projected forward looks like an elephant, eminent by virtue of the boons bestowed is Indrajith by name.
6::59::16::He who resembles Vindhya Mountain in the west (where the sun sets) and the Mahendra mountain (in size) seated on the chariot, is a great chariotwarrior, a hero unequalled in size, wielding a bow whose body is grown out of size, who is coming in sight is by name Atikaya.
6::59::17::He whose eyes are coppery red in anger, who rides on elephant resembles the beating of bells, roars in harsh tone are a great courageous one by the name Mahodara.
6::59::18::He who is mounted on horses decorated with gold shining, like a mountain crowned with cloud, radiant as the Sun holding the shining yokes coming at high speed is by name Pisacha.
6::59::19::He who comes firmly shining like lightning, surpassing thunderbolt in speed, seizing a trident, riding a Lordly bull shining like a mountain is the famous Trisira.
6::59::20::There comes Kumbha whose form is like a cloud in form, whose chest is fleshy and broad. He is fully prepared, coming with a sign of the king of serpents (Vasuki) stretching his bow.
6::59::21::There comes Nikumbha, studded with gold and diamonds, shining and smoky, who is the chief of Rakshasa army seizing an iron club, is capable of wonderful and terrific deeds.
6::59::22::Again, comes Naranthaka, with multitude of swords and arrows, mounted on top of a chariot with flags, blazing like fire, who fights with mountain peaks.
6::59::23::One who is surrounded by several hideous forms, like heads of tigers, camels, Lordly elephants and horses, rolling eyes, just as Rudra by his attendants, who is surrounded by Rakshasas and is humbled by the pride of even Devatas, over him shines the white canopy resembling the moon with slender ribs is the king of Rakshasas.
6::59::24::There is the king of Rakshasas shining like Sun, whose countenance shines with hanging earrings, of terrible form like the Himalayas and Vindhya, who has humbled the pride of Mahendra and Yama.
6::59::25::Then Rama the scourge of enemies replied Vibheeshana, Oh! Ravana! King of Rakshasas is endowed with luminous glory.
6::59::26::Ravana blazing like the sun is difficult to gaze even. His shine is spread all over and not perceptible to discern.
6::59::27::Among the Devas and Danavas such brilliance is not there. He shines so brightly.
6::59::28::The great warriors of Ravana fighting in war are like mountains and all fought with mountains and glowing weapons.
6::59::29::The Rakshasa king is surrounded by sharp, furious beings of terrible valour shining like the god of death.
6::59::30::By his good luck, this sinful one has come under my sight. I will give vent to my wrath born of Sita's abduction.
6::59::31::Indomitable Rama having spoken in that manner, followed by Lakshmana got ready and took out an excellent bow and stood.
6::59::32::There upon the great soul, the king of Rakshasas thus spoke to the strong army of Rakshasas, Fully complacent, free from any apprehension be stationed at the gates and the buildings of the four main streets.
6::59::33::Coming to know that I am here with you, this side, considering it to be a weak point, the forest dwellers may enter the vacant city and Devastate all united.
6::59::34::After the counsellors departed from there Ravana pierced through the ocean of Vanaras just as gigantic fish would pierce in the sea.
6::59::35::Watching Ravana advancing suddenly on the battlefield with great speed, Sugriva took a huge mountain top and went towards Rakshasa king.
6::59::36::Seizing mountain tops whose slopes were filled with trees Sugriva hurled at the night rangers. Watching this Ravana quickly broke them with his arrows fixed with golden shafts.
6::59::37::After that slope covered with excellent trees had fallen on the ground and broken, Ravana got readied with an arrow as if for arranging destruction like the spirit of death.
6::59::38::Seizing an arrow which shone like sparks of fire and had the speed of wind, nay vied with thunderbolt of Indra in speed, he (Ravana) released an arrow in anger.
6::59::39::That arrow released from Ravana's arm, which was hard and sharp as the thunderbolt of Indra, pierced Sugriva just as the sharp thorn edged spear of Guha penetrated Krauncha mountain.
6::59::40::That hero (Sugriva) hurt by the arrow lost senses and fell on the ground groaning in the battlefield. Seeing that the Rakshasas shouted joyfully overtaken by evil spirits.
6::59::41::Thereafter Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sudamshtra, Rshaba, Jyothimukha and Nala increasing their body size rushed towards the king of Rakshasas.
6::59::42::The Rakshasa Lord made the mountain peaks useless by the hundreds of arrows released by him. The streams of arrows with golden shafts could resist the Rakshasas and strike the Vanara king.
6::59::43::The Vanara leaders of fierce form torn by the streams of sharp arrows discharged in the three directions fell covering the ground.
6::59::44::Those monkeys struck and fallen by the piercing of arrows shrieking went to seek refuge from Rama.
6::59::45::The great soul Rama who was holding a bow went seizing it. Lakshmana approached him immediately with folded hands and addressed Rama with words consonant with truth.
6::59::46::I will exterminate the evil minded Ravana. Oh! noble brother, may I be permitted to complete the task
6::59::47::Sri Rama, who was highly energetic and truthful in enthusiasm to succeed, told Lakshmana, You go and be careful in the battle.
6::59::48::Ravana is a great hero in the battlefield. His valour in war is wonderful. He is angry but none can withstand him in the three worlds.
6::59::49::Remaining alert, apply your arrows in the direction of his arrows. Looking at his arrows carefully, making an effort to protect yourself, set your bow.
6::59::50::On hearing Raghava's words, son of Sumitra embraced him and offered prayers, paying respects sallied forth for the encounter.
6::59::51::He saw Ravana, endowed with round shoulders like elephant trunks, with fierce bow glowing and the broken bodies of Vanaras spread all over. Ravana was showering nets of arrows and instigating vanaras.
6::59::52::The son of the wind god, Hanuman, a brilliant one seeing Ravana, obstructed the stream of arrows and darted towards him.
6::59::53::Courageous Hanuman seeing the chariot of Ravana lifting his right arm menacing him spoke these words.
6::59::54::Your life is surely secure from gods, demons, Gandharvas and Yakshas and Rakshasas but you fear Vanaras.
6::59::55::I raised this right arm that way with five branches (five fingers) at you that will expel your subtle self (made up of the five subtle elements) from your body.
6::59::56::Ravana of truly fierce valour, hearing Hanuman's words, his eyes became blood red and spoke to Hanuman this way.
6::59::57::O Vanara! Go about without any hesitation. Attain the fame of a Vanara hitting Ravana permanently. Thereafter knowing your prowess, I shall put an end to you.
6::59::58::Having heard Ravana's words, Hanuman said, Think of your son Akshaya killed by me earlier.
6::59::59::Having spoken that way by Hanuman, the Lord of Rakshasas slapped his hand on Hanuman's chest.
6::59::60::Smacked by him (Ravana), Hanuman, a brilliant and intelligent one stood firm for a while and picking up courage, highly enraged struck the enemy of gods with his palm.
6::59::61::Thereupon, struck by the great soul, Vanara, the ten headed Ravana was shaken like the earthquake on the mountain together.
6::59::62::Ravana hit by hand in that way in a hard manner, the siddhas, demons as well and even Devatas raised their voice.
6::59::63::And thereafter, thus spoke extremely energetic Ravana recovering from breath, Well done vanara. You are courageous and praiseworthy, my enemy!
6::59::64::Ravana having spoken in that way, Maruti said Oh Ravana! What a shame on my valour, you survived.
6::59::65::O evil minded one, why do you brag You do this once more I will strike you once again with my fist and send you to the abode of Yama.
6::59::66::Consequent to Maruti speaking like that, Ravana's eyes turned red, burning with anger. The powerful Ravana lifted his right fist instantly and brought it down on his powerful enemy.
6::59::67::Hit on his chest, Hanuman got hurt again and reeled. Seeing Hanuman's power, overcome with fear, the best charioteer Ravana drove quickly towards Neela.
6::59::68::The ten headed indomitable Lord of Rakshasas with his arrows that resembled serpents, dreadful, capable of piercing into vital parts began to strike at Neela, the leader of monkeys.
6::59::69::Pressured by the streams of arrows, the monkey leader, Neela single handed took up a peak of a mountain and hurled at the Lord of Rakshasas.
6::59::70::Endowed with a great mind and energetic Hanuman became alert and seeking to fight with Ravana, feeling fresh, enraged, looking at Nila said It is not correct to attack one who is fighting with another.
6::59::71::Ravana, endowed with extraordinary energy attacked that peak hurled by Neela with seven sharp arrows and it fell broken into pieces.
6::59::72::On seeing the crushed peak, Neela, the killer of stupendous foes, shone like fire at universal destruction in anger.
6::59::73::In the battle Neela hurled Aswakarana, Sala and Mango trees in good bloom and several other trees at Ravana.
6::59::74::Ravana broke those trees in return and showered rain of formidable arrows at Neela.
6::59::75::When Neela was covered by Ravana's arrows, it was just as clouds cover mountain peaks. Neela reduced his size and landed on top of Ravana's bow.
6::59::76::Neela stood on top of the post of the bow of Ravana. On seeing that Ravana was burning in anger while Neela roared.
6::59::77::Then, when Ravana was unable to release the arrow from the bow on Neela, who was shifting from the top of the post to the crown. Seeing that Lakshmana, Rama and Hanuman were amazed.
6::59::78::Ravana endowed with extraordinary energy was also wonder struck at Neela's agility. Then he took up the shining shaft presided over by fire god.
6::59::79::Thereafter, seeing Neela's feat in the war, Ravana was agitated and the Vanaras were cheerful for having achieved their wish and shouted in joy.
6::59::80::Provoked by the clamour of the vanaras, Ravana's heart was full of anger and did not know what to do.
6::59::81::And then the night ranger Ravana taking up, fitting the arrow charged with fire, looked at Neela resting on top of the bow.
6::59::82::Ravana endowed with extraordinary energy said, Oh monkey, you are unfair, very tricky and further deceptive.
6::59::83::Oh monkey! You are taking different forms and doing different deeds. If you have the ability, save your life.
6::59::84::The arrow released by me now is charged with a missile and will destroy your life. You have been protecting (changing your forms) your life.
6::59::85::Speaking like that, Ravana, the king of Rakshasas chanting the mantras and fixing the arrow struck the commander in chief (Neela) of the Vanara army.
6::59::86::Struck by the arrow propelled by the missile (of Ravana) on the chest, Neela fell on the ground.
6::59::87::By virtue of his father's greatness and his own power, his life did not cease but he fell on the ground.
6::59::88::Finding the vanara unconscious the ten headed Ravana who was eager to fight went towards Saumithri in the chariot making sounds that resembled the sound of rattling of clouds.
6::59::89::In the midst of the battlefield stood Ravana, intercepting with his glowing bow making loud sounds as though shaking the earth.
6::59::90::Saumithri who was not depressed in spirit (by Ravana's attack) addressing Ravana who was stretching his bow said Oh! Lord of night rangers, Be aware. You ought not to fight with vanaras.
6::59::91::Hearing the challenging statement of the king of Rakshasas and hearing the vibrating sound, Saumithri standing close by spoke these wrathful words.
6::59::92::Oh Raghava! You have come under the path of my sight. You are going to meet your end. You who are perverted in mind, struck by a stream of my arrows will reach the abode of death this very moment.
6::59::93::Saumithri, not surprised at the screaming of Ravana with his projected teeth, said, You are great in sinful action. People of great valour do not display such bluster. Do not shout like that.
6::59::94::Your valour, heroism, strength and prowess are known to me. I stand firmly with bow and arrow come on. What is the use of bragging
6::59::95::Lakshmana, having spoken in that manner, the Lord of Rakshasas released seven arrows with beautiful plumes. Lakshmana tore them into pieces with sharp pointed and sharpheaded arrows with gold shafts.
6::59::96::Seeing the arrows cut down with force broken pieces like coils of serpents, the Lord of Lanka overtaken by anger let go another sharp arrow.
6::59::97::The brother of Rama stretched his bow into a circle and showered rain of piercing arrows. He tore the arrows of his enemy with his arrows Kshura, Ardhachandra, karni and Balan without nay, perturbance.
6::59::98::Ravana, the enemy of gods seeing all his streams of arrows ineffective, was astonished at Lakshmana's skill, and let go sharp arrows again and again.
6::59::99::Lakshmana also, who is comparable to Mahendra, fitting his bow and arrows that shone like fire released sharp and pointed arrows to put an end to Rakshasa king.
6::59::100::The Rakshasa king broke into pieces those arrows of Lakshmana and struck him on the forehead with the arrow gifted to him by Brahma, that was bright like the fire at the time of universal destruction.
6::59::101::Lakshmana hurt by Ravana's dart, shaken up, seizing the bow feebly with great difficulty regaining consciousness tore the bow of the enemy of Indra into pieces in return.
6::59::102::Then Lakshmana son of Dasaratha, struck the bow of the king into pieces with three sharp and pointed arrows. The king swooned and recovered with great difficulty.
6::59::103::Hurt by the arrows, bow cut, bathed in blood, limbs splattered with fat, Ravana the enemy of gods, himself being endowed with formidable energy gifted by the Self born creator seized javelin on the battlefield.
6::59::104::The Lord of the world of Rakshasas instantly flung javelin, emitting fire without smoke, on Saumithri, which created fear among Vanaras.
6::59::105::Lakshmana, the brother of Bharata struck the fierce weapon coming towards him like flames of fire fuelled by ghee, even then it struck him on his broad chest.
6::59::106::Lakshmana the eminent hero of Raghu's was badly hurt by the javelin and was burning in pain. King Ravana caught him who was losing consciousness, violently and held him by his shoulders.
6::59::107::It may be possible to lift Himalayas, Mandara, Meru mountains or even the Devatas of the three worlds but not possible to lift Lakshmana by shoulders.
6::59::108::Even though Saumithri was wounded in the chest and the power of Brahma entered (into his chest) he recalled himself as an inconceivable form of Vishnu.
6::59::109::Thereafter, Ravana the enemy of Devatas was not capable of lifting Lakshmana's shoulders. Lakshmana could crush the pride of Rakshasas.
6::59::110::Then the son of the wind god, enraged, came towards Ravana. Full of anger, he struck him with his thunderbolt like fist on the chest of Ravana.
6::59::111::By the blow of Hanuman's fist, Ravana the Lord of Rakshasas was shaken and fell on the ground on his knees.
6::59::112::Much blood flowed from his(Ravana's) mouth, ears, and eyes. Rolling in the hind part of the chariot he became still and sank.
6::59::113::Ravana of fierce valour having lost senses and waking up from unconscious state, perturbed, did not know where he was. Seeing this the sages, even Vanaras, the demons as well as Devatas shouted in joy.
6::59::114::Brilliant Hanuman holding Lakshmana wounded by Ravana in both shoulders brought him to Rama.
6::59::115::Lakshmana though unshakeable for enemies, became light for the son of wind god by his friendship and high devotion.
6::59::116::That power returned back to Ravana's chariot to its position, leaving Lakshmana, who was difficult to vanquish.
6::59::117::Lakshmana who could destroy foes, recovering from unconsciousness, relieved of wounds again remembered himself to be part of Vishnu of immeasurable power.
6::59::118::Ravana of mighty prowess waking up from consciousness took over his sharp arrows and the great bow also.
6::59::119::Raghava also assailed Ravana seeing the fallen Vanara heroes struck in the combat.
6::59::120::And then Hanuman submitted to Rama, Just as Lord Vishnu mounted on mighty Garuda, you should also be mounted on my back and subdue Ravana.
6::59::121::On hearing the sub mission of Hanuman, Sri Rama, the Lord of humans climbed on the great monkey and saw Ravana on the chariot.
6::59::122::Beholding Ravana, highly energetic Rama wielding his bow went furiously towards him just as Lord Vishnu went with his discuss against Virochana.
6::59::123::Rama created a sound like a clap of thunder ringing intensely, a majestic one and spoke in a deep voice to the king.
6::59::124::Oh! Tiger among Rakshasas, forbear, forbear. Having done such an offence to me, where are you going for deliverance
6::59::125::If you go to Indra or Yama or Sun God or the selfborn Brahma or fire God or Shankara or the ten directions like that, and if you run in front of me you cannot escape.
6::59::126::Oh! king of Rakshasa troop! He, who was struck without support now, even if he were to come now in front, you with your sons and grandsons will be struck to death by him.
6::59::127::By me, who is your adversary, fourteen thousand Rakshasas of fierce forms, who had taken abode at Janasthana and used choicest weapons were exterminated.
6::59::128::On hearing Raghava's words, the mighty strong king of Rakshasas seized with violent anger, recalling earlier enmity, struck with blazing arrows like tongues of fire at the time of universal destruction while Hanuman bore Rama.
6::59::129::Even though Hanuman was hurt by the arrows discharged by the Rakshasa king, being endowed with energy by nature, his energy went on increasing.
6::59::130::Seeing the wounds caused by Ravana to Hanuman, the tiger among monkeys, possibly Rama was seized with anger.
6::59::131::Advancing towards him, (Ravana), Rama tore into pieces his chariot, wheels, horses, standard and canopy including the charioteer and the darts and swords.
6::59::132::Then with a shining thunderbolt like arrows Rama struck with the weapon of Indra into the fine chest in between the shoulders just as Indra would strike the Meru Mountain with his thunderbolt.
6::59::133::He, that heroic king, who was not disturbed hurt by thunderbolt of lightning, was agonized when struck by Rama's arrow and let his bow fall.
6::59::134::Seeing Ravana swooning, great soul Rama took up a crescent shaped arrow and hastily broke his crown into pieces which were shining bright red like the Sun.
6::59::135::Rama said to the king of Rakshasas, who was like a serpent rid of poison without (head) crown, without splendour like the Sun without brightness, his glory lost with the crown broken in the combat.
6::59::136::A great task of killing mighty heroes has been accomplished by you. Therefore, you are exhausted. I declare that I will not send you to death.
6::59::137::King of night rangers! I know you are agonized after the war. Go to Lanka and rest and reenter, mounted on your chariot with bow. You will witness my strength.
6::59::138::Rama having spoken in that way (consoling), the king with his vanity and pride crushed, bow broken into pieces, horses and charioteer killed, wounded by arrows, crown broken entered Lanka hastily.
6::59::139::After the king of prowlers, the enemy of Danavas and Devas entered Lanka, Rama and Lakshmana also drew out the arrows from monkeys in the forefront of the battlefield and went.
6::59::140::The enemy of Indra having been routed, the suras and asuras, the guardians of the four quarters, including the sea, the large serpents, and sages so also the creatures of land and water were joyful.।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकोनषष्टितमस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the fifty ninth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
