6::30::1::तत thereafter, चरा the spies, अक्षोभ्यबलम् unshakable army, तम् them, राघवम् Raghava, सुवेलेशैले Suvela mountain, निविष्टम् camped, लङ्काधिपतये to the king of Lanka, प्रत्यवेदयन् reported.
6::30::2::रावण Ravana, महाबलम् great army, रामम् Rama, प्राप्तम् has camped, चाराणाम् from Spies, श्रुत्वा having heard, किञ्चित् a little, जातोद्वेग felt panicky, अभवत् became, शार्दूलम् to Saardula, वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवीत् said.
6::30::3::निशाचर forest ranger, ते your, वर्ण colour (face colour), आयथावत् च as it should be, दीनश्च piteous, अपि and also, क्रुद्धानाम् angry, अमित्राणाम् enemies, वशम् side, नआगतःकच्चित् not come to you and done anything.
6::30::4::इति and then, तेन by him, अनुशिष्ट questioned, भयविह्वल overwhelmed by fear, शार्दूल to Saardula, तदा then, राक्षसशार्दूलम् tiger among Rakshasas, मन्दम् faint tone, वाचम् these words, उदीरयत् revealed.
6::30::5::राजन् O king!, विक्रान्ता valiant, बलवन्तश्च highly powerful, राघवेण by Raghava, रक्षिताःच are protected also, ते with them, वानरपुङ्गवा Vanara heroes, चारयितुम् spy on, नशक्या not possible.
6::30::6::सम्भाषितुमपि even to converse, नशक्या not possible, अत्र there, सम्प्रश्न to question, नविद्यते not known, पन्था examine, सर्वत all over, पर्वतोपमै resembling mountains, वानरै Vanaras, रक्ष्यते guarded.
6::30::7::तस्मिन् their, बले army, प्रविष्टमात्रे as soon as I entered into, अचारिते was observed, अहम् I, ज्ञात was detected, रक्षोभि even the guards, बलात् forcibly, गृहीत seized, बहुधा many, विचालित rolled on ground, अस्मि me.
6::30::8::जानुभि with knees, मुष्टिभि with fist, दन्ते with teeth, तलैश्च and even with palms, भृशम् intensely, अभिहत beaten, अमर्षणै indignantly, हरिभि the monkeys, बलवद्भि in the army, परिणीत paraded, आस्मि me.
6::30::9::रुधिरादिग्धसर्वाङ्ग all limbs bleeding, विह्वल lost senses, चलितेन्द्रिय lost control of limbs, अहम् I, सर्वत्रपरिणीय all over paraded, रामसंसदम् to the assembly of Rama, नीत led.
6::30::10::हरिभि monkeys also, वध्यमान smitten, कृताञ्जलि offering salutation with folded palms, याचमान pleading, राघवेण from Raghava, परित्रात protection, यदृच्छया by chance, जीवामीति alive.
6::30::11::एष that way, राम Rama, शैलै rocks, शिलाभिश्च and even stones, महावर्णवम् great ocean, पूरयित्वा filled, सायुध equipped with arms, लङ्काया Lanka's, द्वारम् entrance, आश्रित्य taking position, तिष्ठति stands.
6::30::12::महातेजा O glorious one, माम् me, विसृज्य freeing, हरिभि even monkeys, गरुडव्यूहम् in the form of Garuda, आस्थाय forming, पर्वत mountain, वृत surrounded, लङ्कामेव into Lanka, अभिवर्तते is advancing.
6::30::13::प्राकारम् boundary, पुराआयाति before reaching, क्षिप्रम् quickly, एकतरम् one thing, कुरु do, आशु you will, सीतांवा either Sita, प्रयच्छ set out, युद्धंवास्मै good war, प्रदीयताम् to give.
6::30::14::राक्षसाधिप Rakshasa king, स that, रावण Ravana, तदा then, तत् that, श्रुत्वा having heard, मनसा in his mind, तत् that, प्रेक्ष्य reviewing, अथ and then, शार्दूलम् Saardula, सुमहत् a good, वाक्यम् statement, उवाच uttered.
6::30::15::यदि even if, देवगन्धर्वदानव Devas Gandharvas, Danavas, मांप्रतियुध्येरन come to wage war with me, सीतां Sita, प्रदास्यामि give away, सर्वलोकभयादपि threat from all worlds, नैव will not.
6::30::16::महातेजाः glorious, रावणः Ravana, एवम् in that manner, उक्त्वा having spoken, पुनः again, अब्रवीत् said, भवता by you, सेना army, चरिता went about, अत्र there, शूराः warriors, प्लवङ्गमाः among the monkeys.
6::30::17::राक्षस Rakshasa, सौम्य gentle one, दुरासदा difficult to encounter, ये those, वानरा Vanaras, किम् प्रभा who are the powerful ones?, कीदृशा of what kind कस्य whose, पुत्रा sons (are they?), पौत्राश्च grandsons (are they?), तत् it, त्वम् you, आख्याहि may speak of.
6::30::18::तेषाम् their, बलाबलम् strength and weakness, ज्ञात्वा knowing, अत्र here, तथा likewise, प्रतिपत्स्यामि I would like to know what to do, युद्धम् war, इच्छताम् desiring, सङ् ख्यानम् their numbers, अवश्यम् essential, बल strength, कर्तव्यं it is essential.
6::30::19::अथ and now, रावणेन by Ravana, एवम् that way, उक्त having spoken, उत्तमःचर good spy, शार्दूल Saardula, रावणसन्निधौ in the presence of Ravana, इदम् thus, वचनम् these words, वक्तुम् to tell, आरेभे proceeded.
6::30::20::अथ and then, र्क्षरजसः Rksaraja's, पुत्रो son, in war, राजा king, सुदुर्जयः difficult to win over, युधि in war, विश्रुतः widely known, जाम्बवानिति he is known as Jambavan गद्गदस्याथ Gadgada's पुत्त्रोऽत्र son.
6::30::21::आन्य another, गद्गदस्यैव Gadgada's, पुत्त्र son, शतक्रतो an epithet of Indra, (known as Dhumra), गुरुपुत्र son of Brhaspati, (Kesari), यस्य his, पुत्रेण by his son Hanuman, एकेन alone, रक्षसाम् Rakshasas, कदनम् killing of many, कृतम् did.
6::30::22::राजन् O king!, धर्मात्म righteous self, पुत्र son, वीर्यवान् a valiant one, धर्मास्य of the Lord of death (Yamadharma), सुषेणश्च Sushena, अत्र here, स्सोमात्मज moon's son, सौम्य noble, कपि Vanara, अत्र here, दधिमुख Dadhimukha.
6::30::23::सुमुख Sumukha, दुर्मुखश्चात्र Durmukha, वेगदर्शीच Vegadarsi, वानर Vanaras, नूनम् surely, स्वयम्भुवा by the selfborn (Lord Brahma), वानररूपेण in Vanara form, सृष्ट created, मृत्यु God of death.
6::30::24::हुतवहस्य fire god's, पुत्त्र son, स्वयम् himself, सेनापति army chief, नील Nila, अथ here, हनूमानिति is Hanuman, विश्रुत widely known, अनिलस्यपुत्र son of wind god.
6::30::25::शक्रस्य Indra's, नप्ता grandson, दुर्धर्ष indomitable, बलवान् powerful, युवा young, अङ्गद Angada, आश्विसम्भवौ twins born of Ashwini, बलिना strong, मैन्दश्च Mainda, द्विविदश्च and Dwivida, उभौ both, अथ now, वैनस्वतस्य Vynaswathasya's (Yama, the Lord of death ), पुत्त्रा sons, कालान्तकोपमा resemble god of death (spirit of time), गज: Gaja, गवाक्ष: Gavaksha, गवय: Gavaya, शरभः Sarabha, गन्धमादनः Gandhamadana, पञ्च five, शूराणाम् heroes, युद्धकाङ्क्षिणाम् desiring to wage war, दश ten, वानरकोट्यश्च crores of Vanaras, श्रीमताम् prosperous, देवपुत्राणाम् sons of gods, शेषम् remaining ones, आख्यातुम् to speak, नउत्सहे not possible.
6::30::26::सिंहसंहनन built like lion in form, एष that, युवा young one, दशरथस्य Dasaratha's, पुत्त्र son, त्रिशिरा Trisira.
6::30::27::येन by whom, विराध Viradha, निहत was killed, अन्तकोपम one like Lord of death, कबन्धश्च even Kabhanda, रामस्य Rama's, विक्रमे by valour, सदृश equal, कश्चन perhaps, भूवि in this world, नास्ति not.
6::30::28::येन by whom, जनस्थानगता approaching Janasthana, यावन्त all, राक्षसा Rakshasas, हता were killed, रामस्य by Rama, गुणान् virtues, वक्तुम् to speak of, नर human, कश्चित् even, क्षितौ to recount, नशक्त not possible.
6::30::29::यस्य his, बाणपथम् within the range of arrows, प्राप्य strike, वासवःअपि even Indra, नजीवेत् not be alive, धर्मात्मा righteous, मातङ्गानाम् proud elephant, ऋषभःइव like a bull, लक्ष्मणश्च Lakshmana's, अत्र here.
6::30::30::भास्करस्य Sun god's, आत्मसम्भवौ sprung from Sun god, श्वेत Swetha, ज्योतिर्मुखश्च Jyothirmukha, वरुणस्य Varuna's, अन्यःपुत्त्र other son, हेमकूट Hemakuta, प्लवङ्गम monkey, विश्वकर्मसुत son of Vishwakarma, वीर heroes, प्लवगसत्तम foremost among the monkeys, नल Nala, विक्रान्त valiant, बलवान् gallant, वसुपुत्र son of Vasu, विक्रान्त valiant, वेगवान् swift in action, वसुपुत्त्र son of Vasu, स he, दुर्धर is Durdhara, अत्र here.
6::30::31::राक्षसानाम् of the Rakshasas, वरिष्ठश्च jewel, तव your, भ्राता brother, विभीषण Vibheeshana, राघवस्य Raghava's, हिते wellwisher, रत remains, लङ्कापुरीम् city of Lanka, प्रतिगृह्य received.
6::30::32::इति this, सुवेलेशैले on Suvela mountain, अधिष्ठितम् stationed, इदम् thus, सर्वम् everything, वानरंबलम् Vanara strength, तवइदं to you this, समाख्यातम् described, शेषकार्ये rest of the task, भवान् your, गति decide.
