6::81::1::Knowing the highsouled Raghava's mind, Indrajith departed from there and entered the city.
6::81::2::Recollecting those Rakshasas killed, the heroic, mighty and courageous Indrajith's eyes were red in anger.
6::81::3::Paulastya (one of the nine mind born sons of Brahma, a scion of sage Paulastya), stupendous hero, a tormentor of Devatas, Indrajith, surrounded by Rakshasas came out through the western gate.
6::81::4::Indrajith, also witnessing the two brothers Rama and Lakshmana prepared for war, exhibited his trickery.
6::81::5::Indrajith, also through a trick, wanted to make illusory Sita and place her in the chariot surrounded by Rakshasas and thought of killing her.
6::81::6::Evil minded Indrajith, made up his mind to hoodwink every one who decided to kill Sita and went towards the Vanaras.
6::81::7::All the forest animals perceiving Indrajithadvancing became angry and with rocks in hand faced him with enthusiasm.
6::81::8::Hanuman, the elephant among monkeys, taking hold of a huge mountain peak that was difficult to reach marched forward and went.
6::81::9::Hanuman beheld in the chariot of Indrajith, cheerless Sita with one braid, with no desire to live, emaciated by fasting, wearing a single cloth, body not anointed, covered with dust and dirt all over the body, who was dear to Raghava.
6::81::10::He looked at her for a moment and recognised her as Janaka's daughter since he had seen her not long before.
6::81::11::Great Vanara, Hanuman, gazing at miserable, joyless, ascetic woman seated in the chariot, worried, why she is in the chariot. He spoke to the best of Vanara leaders and rushed towards the son of Ravana with them.
6::81::12::Indrajith saw the Vanara army coming towards him, deluded with anger, unsheathed the sword and touched Sita's forehead.
6::81::13::As they were looking at Sita on the chariot trickishly constructed, and she was crying saying, 'O Rama, O Rama', he stood and hit her.
6::81::14::Seeing Indrajith holding Sita's head, Maruti's son, was immersed in grief, and shed tears of sorrow from his eyes.
6::81::15::Looking at Rama's dear wife, of lovely limbs, Hanuman rebuked Indrajith in anger and spoke harsh words.
6::81::16::O evil minded Indrajith! You are born as Rakshasa in the clan of seers of vedic mantras and sought the womb of Rakshasa woman. It is for your own self destruction you seized her hair.
6::81::17::You are ignoble, mean, of sinful prowess, not merciful. You have resolved to take such a sinful action which is not worthy of you. You have no compassion to act in this manner.
6::81::18::This Mythili is sent away from home, from the kingdom, and also distanced from Rama's protection. You are unkind and hitting in this way. What harm has she done?
6::81::19::Indeed, you will not live long after killing Sita. You deserve to be killed for your actions, that is why you have come into my hands.
6::81::20::You deserve to be killed by the world here. Giving up your life, you will be thrown out and descend to the world with those who killed women have gone, after your death.
6::81::21::Hanuman was highly enraged and speaking like got prepared for war and went surrounded by the monkeys towards Indrajith, the son of Rakshasa king.
6::81::22::Rakshasa army troops of mighty prowess, terribly angry, were advancing towards wood dwellers (Vanara troops) and were intercepted by the Vanara troops.
6::81::23::Indrajith shattered the army of monkeys with a thousand arrows. Hanuman the foremost Vanara replied to them as follows.
6::81::24::I will kill your Vaidehi today as you keep seeing her for whose sake Sugriva, you and Rama also came here, said Indrajith.
6::81::25::O Vanara! This day, having killed her, I will kill Rama, Lakshmana, and you, also Sugriva and that ignoble Vibheeshana.
6::81::26::O Hanuman! You said women should not be killed. But whoever causes trouble to the enemy, action should be taken, said Indrajith.
6::81::27::Indrajith having spoken like that killed that crying illusory Sita with a sharpedged sword.
6::81::28::Split diagonally, the ascetic woman with charming hips and pleasing countenance sank into the ground.
6::81::29::Indrajith killed that woman and said to Hanuman see this Vaidehi, Rama's wife, cut up by my sword. Your exertion is useless now.
6::81::30::Indrajith himself with his long sword killed her, then rejoiced, he ascended the chariot and roared in a loud tone.
6::81::31::The sound of his roar was heard by the Vanaras waiting for war standing not far from there, which was difficult for Indrajith to access.
6::81::32::The evil minded son of Ravana was happy at heart after killing Sita. Witnessing the happy form of Indrajith, the sorrowful Vanaras started running all at once.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकाशीतितमस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the eighty first sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic, the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
