6::12::1::Then Ravana who is victorious in wars, looking at the vast assembly (of Rakshasas) ordered Prahastha, the chief of the army.
6::12::2::O Chief of the army You order those who are well versed in the knowledge of all kinds of war and entrust those warriors of four divisions of the army to safeguard the city. Likewise, you ought to order them to be more alert.
6::12::3::Celebrated Prahastha desiring to carry out the king's order assigned the army inside and outside the city.
6::12::4::There after Prahastha, having assigned the army for guarding the city, sat down in front of the king, and appealed.
6::12::5::You are a powerful one. Your army has been posted outside as well as inside. You may tell me at once without any distraction what you intend to do.
6::12::6::Ravana who was keen on doing good to the kingdom desiring happiness and having heard Prahastha's word, said this in the midst of his dear ones.
6::12::7::When there is doubt about dharma, artha and kama, you are capable of deciphering between desirable and undesirable, happiness and sorrow, gain and loss.
6::12::8::The actions carried out by me are always after it is well thought out and decided by all of you. I know that those actions have not failed.
6::12::9::Just as Indra who rules over the moon, sun, stars, and gods attains fortune, accompanied by you I will attain fortune exceedingly at once.
6::12::10::Indeed, rightly I told all of you earlier. Since Kumbhakarna was sleeping I had not informed him about this matter.
6::12::11::Kumbhakarna, the foremost among the wielders of weapons, is very strong. He was sleeping these six months and has arrived now.
6::12::12::This Sita, the consort of Rama was brought from D and akaranya, a place where rakshasas wander.
6::12::13::Sita who walks modestly did not like to enter into my bed (love me ) however much I prayed. I do not think there is anyone who looks like her in the three worlds.
6::12::14::She is a woman of slender waist, plump hips, whose face is like an autumnal full moon. She is gentle and like a golden image. She is like a magical one constructed by Maya.
6::12::15::Beholding her smooth red soles and evenly shaped pinkish nails of feet, love is kindled in me.
6::12::16::On beholding the sacrificial firelike face of Sita glowing like the radiance of the Sun, seeing her prominent nose, her large attractive countenance with beautiful eyes surely, I am overtaken by love and have become a slave to her.
6::12::17::I have been disturbed by passion, which is equal in anger or happiness and makes one pale in grief or agony.
6::12::18::Broadeyed Sita requested me one year time expecting her husband Rama to come (this is a false statement made by Ravana here) and I promised in turn to Sita of beautiful eyes. Just like an exhausted horse that marched I am tired on account of my passion.
6::12::19::How will the Vanaras and even both the sons of Dasaratha be able to cross the unassailable ocean inhabited by huge crocodiles?
6::12::20::Even so, a huge destruction was done to us, by a single monkey. The consequences of their acts are unpredictable. Tell me what is there in your mind, according to your own understanding.
6::12::21::There is no fear of human beings for me. I won the war between Devas and asuras along with you. As it is, all of you are there. There at the shore of the ocean Rama and Lakshmana have collected with Sugriva and other leaders placing Vanaras in front to get back Sita. You may suggest a way out to gain.
6::12::22::You may also think over and suggest to me a plan to kill Rama and Lakshmana without giving Sita.
6::12::23::No one can cross the ocean with Vanaras (help). As such I do not find anyone has the capacity. I am certain of victory.
6::12::24::On hearing the lamentation of Ravana seized with passion, enraged Kumbhakarna uttered these words.
6::12::25::If you had at that time, that is before bringing Sita by force, which was accompanied by Rama and Lakshmana, discussed, and thought of, then you would be sure in your mind like the Yamuna River filling the Yamuna (mountain ).
6::12::26::Great king If you had discussed with us about all this action earlier, it would have been very good.
6::12::27::O Ravana Whoever is the king, having a sense of determination, thinks justifiably and carries out princely duties will not regret.
6::12::28::Tasks carried out without proper plan and contrary to the right principles are spoilt like inauspicious oblations offered into sacrificial fire.
6::12::29::He who seeks to perform earlier what has to be done later and does later what have to be done earlier is not a knower of right and wrong.
6::12::30::A hasty one who acts without thinking of the superior strength (of enemy) gets out at once like the swan penetrates into the crevice of Krauncha (mountain).
6::12::31::Without prior thought this great act has been done by you. Rama has not killed you, fortunately like poison mixed flesh would kill.
6::12::32::O Sinless Ravana Therefore, that which you have done is not possible for none other than me. I will kill your enemy and accomplish your goal for you.
6::12::33::O Rakshasa I will ruin the enemy. I will fight with both of them (Rama and Lakshmana) even if they are Indra and sun, fire god and wind god or Kubera and Varuna.
6::12::34::If I go with a mountain like body and sharp teeth, holding a huge iron bar roaring like a lion, even Indra will run away out of fear.
6::12::35::By the time he releases a second arrow again, I will immediately drink his blood. Stay quiet with confidence.
6::12::36::By killing Rama, I will try to make you happy and victorious. On killing Rama and Lakshmana like that I will consume the Vanara leaders.
6::12::37::You be free from fear, sporting and drinking the best of wines and doing actions that you like. Rama will be sent to the abode of the god of death. On reaching their Sita will be under your control for long.।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेद्वादशस्सर्गः।।This is the end of twelfth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
