6::108::1::Delighted charioteer drove the chariot of Ravana with speed. It was of the shape of the abode of Gandharvas, capable of destroying enemy's army. It had rows of excellent flags, richly endowed, like the best piece of artwork. It was fixed with flag posts in rows touching the sky and filling space. It was yoked to excellent horses adorned with gold chains and equipped with implements for war. The earth was resounding as it was driven as if to crush the enemy's army and its own army was happy.
6::108::2::The chariot bells fixed to the huge flag post were making sounds, yoked to dark horses, and was shining with splendor with rage. It was glowing like a bright sun in the sky displaying its splendor, like the aerial chariot. It looked like a cloud holding water, releasing water of arrows from Rakshasa king's bow. The king of humans saw this chariot.
6::108::3::The flow of arrows (from Ravana) released from the chariot were seen by Rama like the flow of water from rain clouds. Seeing that, Sri Rama made terrific sounds by stretching his bow to crescent shape, and it was as if a mountain struck by thunderbolt had broken and resounding and seeing Matali, charioteer of Indra, Sri Rama spoke as follows.
6::108::4::Matali! the enemy's chariot is darting forward hurriedly. See him coming in the reverse direction with great speed once again. It strikes my mind that he is surely causing his fall.
6::108::5::Being alert, you drive the chariot towards Ravana, just as wind drives the cloud in the sky, as I wish to destroy him.
6::108::6::Drive the chariot swiftly without confusion, without any agitation, with steady heart and vision, controlling the movement of reins and determination.
6::108::7::You are a driver of great Indra's chariot. You are not required to be told. Wishing to fight with rapt attention, I will remind you now and then not instruct you, said Rama to Matali.
6::108::8::Matali, the best charioteer of the Devatas, was highly delighted at Rama's words and started driving.
6::108::9::Then Matali made the chariot turn round and by the dust rising from the rolling wheels of the chariot, Ravana was shaken.
6::108::10::Then furious Ravana, the ten headed Rakshasa, whose eyes turned coppery in anger, struck Rama with arrows.
6::108::11::Rama who was provoked by the assault and army was perturbed. He took up Indra's bow of extraordinary impulse and of high speed like sunbeams.
6::108::12::The arrows endowed with very high speed, glowing in radiance like the sun's radiance, holding the arrows, each one desirous of killing the other stood facing each other, came near, and started fighting like lions in the great war.
6::108::13::Thereafter, the Gandharvas, Devas, Siddhas and sages longing for the end of Ravana came there to witness the duel.
6::108::14::Devas rained blood on Ravana's chariot, wind blew in circles intensely from left to right.
6::108::15::In the sky, a huge flock of eagles hovering on the chariot of Ravana went following the chariot wherever it went.
6::108::16::Lanka seemed glowing in red colour like at dusk, and as though the earth was burning, shrouded with Japa flowers, even though it was daytime.
6::108::17::Meteors and huge fire dropped there indicating Ravana's end. Seeing them, Rakshasas were sad.
6::108::18::Wherever Ravana went, the earth shook. Many Rakshasas felt their hands clasped.
6::108::19::The rays of the Sun fell in front of Ravana, in red, yellow, white, and dark like minerals on the mountain.
6::108::20::The vultures followed by shejackals vomited, burning fire from their mouths indicating inauspiciousness and screamed.
6::108::21::The unfavourable wind that blew in war, clouded the sight of Rakshasa king.
6::108::22::Without clouds, terrific thunderbolts of Indra (rain) dropped on his (Ravana's) army all over causing unbearable sound.
6::108::23::All directions and intermediate points were enveloped by darkness by the shower of dust and the huge sky was obscure.
6::108::24::Hundreds of minas making frightening sounds, fighting in terrific manner emitting dreadful cries had fallen on the chariot there.
6::108::25::His (Ravana's) horses were letting out fire sparks from their hips, tears, water, and fire from their eyes at a time, continuously.
6::108::26::In that manner, many frightful and dreadful objects falling indicated destruction of Ravana.
6::108::27::On all sides appeared indications of signs of victory for Rama, displaying beings delightful and auspicious.
6::108::28::Sri Rama was very delighted over the appearance of good signs of his own victory and thought 'Ravana is destroyed by me'.
6::108::29::Thereafter, Raghava, knower of the signs of victory in war and his own self experience felt joyful and proceeded to put an end to the enemy, exhibiting greater prowess.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेअष्टोत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of one hundred and eighth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
