6::28::1::Then Ravana the king of Rakshasas having heard Saarana's words and described the strength (of Vanaras) Suka spoke these words.
6::28::2::O King! like a banyan tree on the island, like Sala trees on the Himalayan Mountain these people are stationed. You may see them marching. They are strong to encounter, can change form at their free will. They look like gods and Danavas in war and have the valour of gods.
6::28::3::These Vanaras are nine, five and seven thousand crores in number. They are in many thousands of Sankhas and Vrindas.
6::28::4::These are allies of Sugriva ever residing at Kishkinda. They are born to celestial gods and Gandharvas and can change their form at their will.
6::28::5::Do you see two of them standing there? They are young and have the form of gods. They are Mainda and Dwivida. Both of them are similar in war and none equal them in war.
6::28::6::They drank the nectar of immortality with the permission of Brahma. These leaders are aspiring to destroy Lanka by their prowess.
6::28::7::O Lord! You may see the one standing there like an elephant who can churn up the sea when he is angry. He has come to Lanka earlier, seen Sita and gone back. You may see that he has come again.
6::28::8::He is the eldest son born of Kesari and the son of WindGod and is popularly known as Hanuman. He leapt over the sea and came.
6::28::9::He is a jewel among Vanaras. He can change his form at his will. He is endowed with physical strength and charm. Being existent everywhere like windgod his cause cannot be prevented like that of wind god.
6::28::10::When he was a child, on seeing the rising Sun, he travelled three thousand yojanas and said, I will eat up the Sun otherwise I will not be appeased', being proud of his strength.
6::28::11::Unassailable even for gods, sages and Danavas to reach the Sun god, he fell down near the eastern part.
6::28::12::By falling on the mountain one of the jaws of the monkey got broken. This is the reason that he is known as Hanuman.
6::28::13::I came to know about him through one of my contacts. His strength, his appearance and glory are indescribable.
6::28::14::This monkey is intending to demolish this Lanka single handed. How can you forget about (the task of) setting his tail on fire entrusted by you to Dhoomakethu?
6::28::15::O king! the king who is not distant from him, a dark complexioned, one with lotus eyes who never transgresses his righteousness, who is a great charioteer of Ikshvaku race who knows use of Vedas, who is choicest, who knows the weapons presided over by Brahma whose arrows can pierce through the sky and even mountains whose anger is like anger of death, whose valour is like that of Indra whose consort has been borne away from Janasthana is Rama. He is advancing towards you to wage war with you.
6::28::16::To his right is his brother known as Lakshmana whose body radiates like gold, he has broad chest, red eyes, dark curly hair. He is as dear as his life to Rama. He is skilled in moral science and warfare. He is the foremost and the best among wielders of weapons.
6::28::17::He is one who does not forgive (Rama's enemies), difficult to win, indomitable, victorious, strong and wise one. He is the right hand of Rama and external breath of his life.
6::28::18::For the cause of Rama, he will spare his life. He too is intent upon destroying all Rakshasas.
6::28::19::The one who is near Rama's left who sought Rama's refuge and stands surrounded by Rakshasas and protected is the king Vibheeshana.
6::28::20::He is a prosperous king of the kings of Lanka. He has been consecrated by Rama, filled with anger he is advancing to wage war with you.
6::28::21::The one whom you see standing in the midst is the king of all chiefs of the Vanara army, a highly glorious one, steady like a mountain. like Himalayas that outshines all mountains, he surpasses all in fame, in intellect, in wisdom and in lineage. That monkey chief resides in the mountain cave fort with thickly grown trees around in the middle of Kishkinda, which is difficult to access, and is surrounded by his army chiefs. See the golden chain on him shining away with hundred lotuses in which stands Lakshmi installed which is difficult even for gods and human beings to covet. In the same way as the golden chain, even his beloved Tara and kingdom of the monkeys was permanently bestowed upon him by Rama after slaying Vali.
6::28::22::It is said by wise men that hundred thousand crores multiplied by hundred thousand crores as Sankha.
6::28::23::A lakh of Sanku is known as Maha Sanku. A lakh of Maha Shanka is spoken as Vrinda. A lakh of Vrindas is spoken as Maha Brinda. A lakh of Maha Vrindas is known as Padma. One lakh Padmas is known as Maha Padma and a lakh of Maha Padmas is known as Kharva. A lakh of Kharvas is known as Maha Kharva and a lakh of Maha Kharvas is known as a Samudra. A lakh of Samudras is known as an Ogha. A lakh of Oghas is popularly known as Maha Ogha.
6::28::24::In this manner (surrounded by) thousand crore Sankhas, a hundred thousand MahaSankhas, so also by a hundred Vrindas and thousand MahaVrindas, so also by a hundred Padmas and a thousand Mahapadmas, similarly by a hundred Kharvas nay by a Samudra, and similarly by a hundred Oghas and a hundred crore MahaOghas of monkey warriors, accompanied by gallant Vibheeshana and his ministers Sugriva the king of monkeys is ever surrounded by the great army of highly valiant and strong warriors is marching to wage war.
6::28::25::O Great King! Observing the ocean of army close by their appearing cruel like a blazing planet, make supreme efforts to be victorious and not to be defeated in the hands of the enemy.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेअष्टाविंशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the twenty eighth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
