6::11::1::मैथिलीकाममोहितः infatuated with passion towards Mythili, सः that, पापं: sinner, राजा: king, सुहृदाम् those who were dear to him, असन्मानाच्च: disregarded, पापेन: on account of sinful, कर्मणा: actions, कृशः weak, बभूव: became.
6::11::2::रावणः Ravana, तस्मिन् on account of, अतीतसमये: elapsed, काले: time, अमात्यैश्च: with ministers, सुहृद्भिश्च: with his friends, युधि: about war, प्राप्तकालम् right time, अमन्यत: considered for consultation.
6::11::3::सः he (Ravana), हेमजालविततम् overlaid with golden latticework, मणिविद्रुमभूषितम् decked with gems and corals, विनीताश्वम् trained horses,महारथम् magnificent chariot, उपगम्य: having reached, आरुरोह: ascended.
6::11::4::रक्षसाम् of Rakshasas, श्रेष्ठः eminent, दशग्रीवः tenheaded Ravana, महामेघसमस्वनम् making sound like the roaring noise of a huge cloud, तम् him, रथश्रेष्ठम् best chariot, आस्थाय: climbed up, सभांप्रति: to assembly, प्रययौ: went.
6::11::5::ततः then, असिचर्मधराः wielding swords and all kinds of weapons, योधाः soldiers, सर्वायुधधराः different kinds of weapons, राक्षसाः Rakshasas, राक्षसेन्द्रस्य: Lord of Rakshasas, पुरस्तात् in front, सम्प्रतस्थिरे: stood at that time.
6::11::6::नानाविकृतवेषाश्च: adorned in different kinds of uncouth attire, नानाभरणभूषिताः wearing different kinds of ornaments, तत: thereafter, एनम् by his, पार्श्वतः sides, पष्ठतश्चैव: and also back, परिवार्य: surrounding, ययुः went.
6::11::7::अतिरथाः great charioteers, रथैः chariots, मत्तै: proud elephants, वरवारणैः excellent, आक्रीडद्भिः sporting, वाजिभिश्च: and horses also, दशग्रीवम् tenheaded Ravana, शीघ्रम् swiftly, अनूत्पेतुः followed.
6::11::8::गदापरिघहस्ताश्च: maces and iron bars in their hands, शक्तितोमरपाणयः holding strong iron clubs in hand, परश्वथधराः holding battle axes, अन्ये: others शूलपाणयः with tridents in their hands, अन्येच: and other.
6::11::9::ततः then, रावणे: as Ravana, सभाम् to the assembly, गच्छति: as he entered, तूर्यसहस्राणाम् thousands of band instruments, महान् high, निस्स्वनः sounded, तुमुलः tumultuous noise, शङ्खशब्दश्च: sounds of conchs, सञ्जज्ञे: broke forth.
6::11::10::महान् great, सः he, महारथः great chariot, नेमिघोषेण: rattling sound of chariot, अभिनिनादयन् echoed in all directions, श्रिया: bright, जुष्टम् pleasing, राजमार्गम् royal path, सहसा: all at once, प्रतिपेदे: entered.
6::11::11::राक्षसेन्द्रस्य: Lord of Rakshasa's, विमलम् pure, पाण्डुरम् white canopy, प्रगृहीतम् taking hold, आतपत्राणाम् spread like lines, पूर्णः full, ताराथिपो: like the Lord of stars (moon), यथा: like that, अशोभत: was shining.
6::11::12::हेममञ्जरिगर्भे: with golden bouquet in the middle, शुद्धस्फटिकविग्रहे: pure crystal like handles, चामरव्यजने: a pair of fans, तस्य: its, सव्यदक्षिणे: on left and right side, रेजतुः glowed.
6::11::13::पृथिवीस्थिताः standing on the ground, सर्वे: all, सतेराक्षसाः those Rakshasas, कृताञ्जलयः with folded palms, रथस्थम् seated in the chariot, राक्षसश्रेष्ठम् foremost of Rakshasas, तम् him, शिरोभिस्तं: bowing their heads, ववन्दिरे: offered salutations.
6::11::14::तदा: then, अरिन्दमः conqueror of foes, महातेजाः exceptionally splendid, राक्षसैः by Rakshasas, जयाशीर्भि: victory to you, prosperity to you', स्तूयमानः having praised, विरचिताम् well built, सभाम् royal court, आससाद: reached.
6::11::15::वपुषा: whose body was embodied with, विराजमानः glowing, महातेजा: exceptionally splendid, सुवर्णरजतास्तीर्णाम् pillars made of gold and silver, विशुद्धस्फटिकान्तराम् inside of which is pure like crystal, रुक्मपट्टोत्तरच्छदाम् carpeted with shining bright golden silk, षडिभः six, पिशाचशतैः hundred devils, अभिगुस्ताम् very beautiful, सदाप्रभाम् ever shining, विश्वकर्मणा: by Vishwakarma, सुकृताम् wellconstructed, ताम् that, प्रविवेश: entered.
6::11::16::सः he, रावणः Ravana, तस्याम् his, वैडूर्यमयम् encrusted with Vaidurya gems,प्रियकाजिनसम्वृतम् covered with deer skin, सोपाश्रयम् which had a pillow, महत् huge, परमासनम् excellent seat, भेजे: sat.
6::11::17::ततः then, लघुपराक्रमान् quick footed, दूतान् messengers, ईश्वरवत् like Lord, महत् great, कृत्याम् task, अस्ति: for us, शत्रुभिः against enemies, कर्तव्यम् इति: this has to be performed, जाने: you may know, एतान् that way, राक्षसान् Rakshasas, क्षिप्रम् at once, मे: to me, इह: here, समानयत: with you, इति: thus, शशास: commanded.
6::11::18::राक्षसाः those Rakshasas, तद्वचः that which was spoken, श्रुत्वा: having heard, विहारशयनेषु: places of recreation and bedrooms, उद्यानेषुच: also into recreational gardens, अवस्थाय: residing, रक्षांसि: Rakshasas, चोदयन्तः directing, अभीतवत् without fear, लङ्कायाम् in Lanka, अनुगेहम् every house, परिचक्रमुः went round.
6::11::19::ते: of these, एके: some, रुचिरान् on exquisite, रथान् chariots, एके: some, दृप्तान् proud, दृढान् sturdy, हयान् on horses, एके: some, नागान् elephants, अधिरुरुहुः ascended, एके: some, पदातयः on foot.
6::11::20::सम्पतद्भिः that prosperous capital, रथकुञ्जरवाजिभिः chariots elephants and horses, परमाकीर्णा: in groups, सापुरी: that capital, गरुत्मद्भिः filled with birds, अम्बरमिव: like the sky, विरुरुचे: was shining.
6::11::21::ते: those, वाहनानि: vehicles, विविधानि: of several kinds, यानानिच: at the entrance and, अवस्थाप्य: parking, सिंहाः lions, गिरिगुहामिव: like a cave of a mountain, सभाम् royal court, पद्भिः on foot, प्रविविशुः entered.
6::11::22::ते: they राज्ञः king's, पादौ: feet, गृहीत्वा: clasping, राज्ञा: to king, प्रतिपूजिताः offering salutations, अन्येय: some, पीठेषु: on golden seats, अन्ये: some, बृसीषु: on kusa grass mats, केचित् while some, भूमौ: on the floor, उपाविशन् took seat.
6::11::23::तेराक्षसाः those Rakshasas, राजशासनात् by the king's command, सभायाम् in the royal court, समेत्य: settled in appropriate seats, ते: they, राक्षसाधिपम् leaders of Rakshasas, रावणम् at Ravana, यथार्हम् close by, उपतस्थुः sat.
6::11::24::निश्चयार्थे: in deciding matters, पण्डिताः learned, मन्त्रिणश्च: and also ministers, गुणोपेताः virtuous, सर्वज्ञाः knowledgeable, बुद्धिदर्शनाः who can visualise things with their intellect, अमात्याश्च: army men, तथा: likewise, शतशः in hundreds, बहवः many, शूराः heroes, तत्र: there, हेमवर्णायाम् shining with golden colour, सभायाम् in the royal assembly, सर्वार्थस्य: to deliberate on all matters, सुखायवै: for a happy conclusion, यथामुख्याः important people, समीयुः collected.
6::11::25::ततः thereafter, महात्मा: great, यशस्वी: illustrious, विभीषणः Vibheeshana, विपुलम् broad, सुयुग्यं: yoked with good horses, हेमविचित्रिताङ्गम् decked with gold, शुभम् auspicious, वरम् choicest, रथम् chariot, आस्थाय: having ascended, अग्रजस्य: of the elder brother, संसदम् assembly, ययौ: went.
6::11::26::अथ: and then, सः that Vibheeshana, अवरजः younger brother, पूर्वजाय: elder brother's, नाम: name, श्शशंस: repeated, पश्चात् after that, चरणौ: to the feet, ववन्दे: offered salutations, शुकः Suka, प्रहस्तश्च: Prahastha also, तथैव: likewise, तेभ्यः both, यथार्हम् in accordance with their position, असनानि: seats, पृथक् different, ददौ: offered.
6::11::27::संसदि: in that court, सुवर्णनानामणिभूषणानाम् decorated with different kinds of golden and gem colours, सुवाससाम् beautiful clothes, राक्षसानाम् Rakshasa's, परार्घ्यागुरुचन्दनानाम् best of fragrances like incense and sandal paste, स्रजाश्च: floral garlands, गन्धा: fragrance of sandal, समन्तात् everywhere, प्रववुः spread all round.
6::11::28::सभासदः those who assembled, नचुक्रुशुः not make noise, कश्चित् even a little,अनृतम् untruth, नाह: not, उच्चैः uttered, नजजल्पुः not speak, अपिसर्वेसंसिद्धार्धा: and all were fully accomplished, उग्रवीर्याः very heroic, तेसर्वे: all of them, भर्तुः Lord, आननम् face, ददृशुः looked at.
6::11::29::तस्याम् in that सभायाम्: assembly, मनस्वी: heroic, सरावणः that Ravana, शस्त्रभृताम् those who held arms, मनस्विनां: heroes, महाबलानाम् of great prowess, समितौ: in battle, वसूनाम् among Vasus (gods ), मध्ये: in the midst, वज्रहस्तः Indra who holds a diamond bolt, इव: like, प्रभया: with glow, चकाशे: shone.
