6::17::1::Vibheeshana, having addressed Ravana in harsh language, reached Rama and Lakshmana in a short while.
6::17::2::All the Vanaras on the ground saw Vibheeshana who was like Mount Meru in form and shining like a brilliant lightning.
6::17::3::His four companions of terrific prowess were also there with him. They were wearing all weapons and were adorned with excellent ornaments.
6::17::4::Vibheeshana looked like a mass of cloud, like someone who can cause thunderbolt, possessing excellent weapons and wonderful jewels.
6::17::5::Wise Sugriva the Lord of the Vanara army, a formidable one along with Vanaras, started thinking on seeing Vibheeshana (the fifth one) besides four others.
6::17::6::Reflecting for a while he addressed Hanuman and the other Vanara leaders in this way.
6::17::7::Armed with all kinds of weapons this Rakshasa along with four Rakshasas are coming near to attack. You may see. There is no doubt.
6::17::8::Having heard Sugriva's words, all the Vanara leaders taking up Sala trees and boulders uttered these words.
6::17::9::O King Order us to kill these evil minded ones at once. Being mortals and of short life, on striking, all of them will fall down dead on the ground.
6::17::10::As they (Vanaras) started conversing, Vibheeshana, having reached the northern shore, stayed in the sky.
6::17::11::Great and very wise Vibheeshana, gazing at Sugriva and the Vanaras, addressed them in a loud tone.
6::17::12::I am called Vibheeshana, the younger brother of Ravana, the king of Rakshasas and of evil conduct.
6::17::13::Having been carried away from Janasthana by him (Ravana) poor and pitiable Sita is detained and protected by the Rakshasas.
6::17::14::I argued with him again and again in several ways to explain him and admonished him saying 'restore Sita to Rama'.
6::17::15::Impelled by death Ravana would not take good words of advice tendered to him just as one who is impelled by death does not take medicine.
6::17::16::Leaving my sons and wife, I have come for protection of Raghava having been put to shame by him (Ravana), spoken to harshly and treated like a slave.
6::17::17::At once you may inform Raghava who is a protector of the whole world that I, Vibheeshana, are waiting here.
6::17::18::Highly valiant Sugriva having heard all this (from Vibheeshana) eagerly spoke these words to Rama in the presence of Lakshmana.
6::17::19::Ravana's younger brother, known as Vibheeshana, along with four Rakshasas has come to you seeking protection.
6::17::20::O Scorcher of enemies For Vanara's safety and considering to be spies also you should be alert in your deliberations, with a plan and policy in moving together and deciding what is to be done. Let you be safe.
6::17::21::Know that these Rakshasas are heroic, crafty and cannot be trusted. They can change their form at will and can move about without being seen.
6::17::22::This Rakshasa may be a spy who has found entry into our camp to create differences (among us). No doubt about it.
6::17::23::Or else if he is a wise one and knows our weak points, might have found a way and reached us. He may strike us if he is trusted.
6::17::24::Army of friends or army from a jungle, so also an army brought up by a king for generations, army obtained on payment and all kinds of army except for enemies can be accepted.
6::17::25::O king, by nature they are Rakshasas, and he is brother of the enemy. Evidently, he has arrived by himself. How to trust him?
6::17::26::O Rama of most forbearing nature Vibheeshana is sent by Ravana. You may consider that he is fit to be arrested, I think.
6::17::27::O Raghava You may know that this Rakshasa is being sent here by deceit ever intending to strike you under the cover of creating confidence.
6::17::28::One who entered the enemy's camp and had access to come inside kills the enemies. It is like an owl killing many crows having entered the hole.
6::17::29::Let us kill this Vibheeshana by punishment along with his ministers as he is the brother of cruel Ravana (said Sugriva to Rama).
6::17::30::The chief of the army (Sugriva) who knew how to speak appropriately having submitted in that manner to Rama who was adept in expression remained silent.
6::17::31::Rama of great fame having heard the words of Sugriva, addressed the Vanara army including the great Hanuman who stood close by.
6::17::32::The highly reasonable words of advice given by the king of Vanaras about Ravana's brother was heard even by you.
6::17::33::It is always desirable to seek everlasting advice for one's welfare from capable and wise ones by the near and dear ones. It is proper to seek advice on complex matters by one who is in a difficult situation.
6::17::34::The Vanaras having heard the words spoken by Rama in that way, tendered beneficial advice and their own opinion respectfully, to be vigilant.
6::17::35::O Raghava there is nothing unknown to you in the three worlds. You are asking our opinion (giving us the honour) out of friendship.
6::17::36::You are a truthful follower of vows, a heroic and righteous one. You are firm in your resolve, capable of good judgment, have a good memory of the past traditions and committed in heart to your friends.
6::17::37::On account of that reason, since your ministers are richly endowed with intelligence let them speak out again and again, one after the other in that way.
6::17::38::Having said so, Angada the intelligent Vanara spoke these words immediately to Rama for judging Vibheeshana.
6::17::39::Since he has come from the enemy's camp suddenly, surely Vibheeshana is to be suspected in every way. He is not worthy to be trusted.
6::17::40::One who has a perfidious mind keeps moving about concealing his intention and will attack at weak points, which will be a great inestimable mistake.
6::17::41::Ascertaining advantages and disadvantages one should take the right course of action, by acting if it is virtuous and giving up if it is faulty.
6::17::42::If there are great bad qualities (in Vibheeshana) no doubt he has to be rejected. If there are many virtues let us take him knowing them also.
6::17::43::Sarabha has also decided and spoken these meaningful words of advice. O Tiger among men Let a spy be assigned to cover him at once.
6::17::44::By employing a spy with subtle intellect to examine Vibheeshana, we can act in an appropriate manner to accept him (Vibheeshana).
6::17::45::Then, enlightened Jambavan who was endowed with sense of discrimination, considering all facts made his submission which was free from flaws.
6::17::46::Vibheeshana who has conceived bitter hatred towards the sinful Rakshasa king Ravana came without regard for place and time is always to be viewed with suspicion.
6::17::47::Mainda, who was prudent in making policy and rich in expression, considering all facts expressed this statement that was fully logical.
6::17::48::O king of mortals This is Ravana's brother called Vibheeshana. Let him be slowly and gently interrogated for long.
6::17::49::O Best of kings After truly ascertaining Vibheeshana's intention whether he is wicked or not, you may act wisely (said Mainda).
6::17::50::On the other hand, Hanuman who was endowed with rich culture spoke these soft, sweet, and meaningful words briefly.
6::17::51::Even for Brihaspati who is proclaimed to be highly intelligent, it is not possible to surpass you as you are the foremost in capability and eloquence.
6::17::52::O King Rama I am telling this to you truly not for the sake of argument, not for the sake of creating friction, or with a sense of superiority, or desire but out of respect.
6::17::53::Your counsellors have said that after judging good or bad qualities we should accept or reject Vibheeshana. I see a flaw in that statement as such action would not arise.
6::17::54::When entrusted with duty one's capability will be known. It is not possible to appoint him for duty inconsiderately without understanding (his capacity) as it will be faulty.
6::17::55::Your counsellors (Sarabha) have said that it is proper to know from the spies to ascertain about him. It has no meaning as it is not possible to do so (as he is near you). It does not serve the purpose.
6::17::56::This Vibheeshana has come here without regard for place and time. I desire to speak what I feel in this regard.
6::17::57::It seems proper for him (Vibheeshana) to come here, considering place and time and so also considering that you are superior to him (Ravana) even if there are demerits in him and merits in you.
6::17::58::He has thought over and seen wickedness in Ravana, likewise valiance in you has made you come here. He seems to be right and suitable.
6::17::59::O king People of unknown identity should enquire about him. (Vibheeshana) said Mainda. Having reviewed the matter, I have another view. (in the matter).
6::17::60::If enquired suddenly, a wise one will also become suspicious of his words. Even a friend who has come there will seem like a wicked one to him.
6::17::61::O king It is not possible to know the intention (of an enemy) of others at once without excessive dexterity. It is to be known by his tone of words and description.
6::17::62::Even when one is speaking, his malevolence is known. It does not seem so as his countenance is also pleasing. Therefore, I have no doubt (of him).
6::17::63::One who is with deceitful feeling will not come without an expression of suspicion. He has come on his own and even his talk and looks are not suspicious to me.
6::17::64::Even if one intends to hide in his external form, it is not feasible to keep it concealed. The inner feeling of a man gets revealed even if cleverly hidden.
6::17::65::O Rama You are the choicest among men of efficient action If according to time and place, one employs to act conformable to people, it yields results speedily.
6::17::66::Reviewing your efforts to kill Ravana and having heard of your trials to kill Vali and about your conferring the kingdom to Sugriva, he (Vibheeshana) has intentionally come here in this manner in order to request you showing respect. He may be accepted as our own person.
6::17::67::O Exceptionally wise Rama You have heard what has been spoken about the ability of Vibheeshana. According to my thinking. You alone being the best judge can decide the rest of it.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेसप्तदशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the seventeenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic, the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
