6::86::1::Ravana's brother seeing Lakshmana spoke these words of advice to accomplish the task and which is not good for the enemies.
6::86::2::The army of Rakshasas looks like a dark cloud and let the monkeys too get engaged to fight swiftly with trees as weapons.
6::86::3::O Lakshmana! Shatter this mighty army of Rakshasas. When it is broken Ravana's son will become visible.
6::86::4::You have come to attack the enemy. Before he completes his action quickly attack him with the thunderbolt of Indra.
6::86::5::Hero, wicked minded, conjurer, unrighteous and cruel one who is a terror for all worlds is Ravana's son. Destroy him.
6::86::6::Lakshmana, who had auspicious marks, on hearing Vibheeshana rained showers of arrows on Ravana's son.
6::86::7::The Bears and monkeys together initiated a fight with the army with trees, mountains, and nails as weapons.
6::86::8::The Rakshasas also launched attacks in the battle with sharp swords, javelins, and lances.
6::86::9::With both the monkeys and Rakshasas mutually striking intensely, the mighty sounds resounded all over Lanka
6::86::10::The sky was covered with weapons of various shapes, arrows, trees, mountain peaks thrown at each other and were dreadful.
6::86::11::The Rakshasas with disfigured faces and arms, attacked the Vanaras, and their bodies pierced with weapons created great fear in them.
6::86::12::The monkeys likewise wounded and assailed the bulls among Rakshasas with trees and mountain peaks in the battle.
6::86::13::Mighty Bears and Vanaras of huge body, fighting in the battle caused great fear in Rakshasas.
6::86::14::Indrajith, who is difficult to overpower, on hearing the cries of his own army in agony got up without completing the task (of ritual).
6::86::15::Enraged, Indrajith coming out of the darkness of trees ascended the chariot already yoked and fixed firmly.
6::86::16::Indrajith, armed with a terrific bow and arrows, his body shining like a rainy cloud, with red eyes, angry face, seemed like the spirit of death.
6::86::17::Seeing Lakshmana prepared for war, the Rakshasa army endowed with speed surrounded him.
6::86::18::In the meantime, Hanuman, who resembled a mountain, a tamer of enemies, who is difficult to overpower, taking up huge trees fighting with Rakshasas created havoc like fire at the time of dissolution and went about.
6::86::19::Seeing the wind god's son destroying, thousands of Rakshasas got together surrounding him.
6::86::20::Between the skilful Rakshasas armed with sharp tridents, swords, javelins in hand, with spears in hand, bright iron bars glowing like fire, with iron axes, dreadful hammers, Bhindi palas and Hanuman, with thunderbolt like fists that descended like lightning, and slaps which descended like mountains, a huge skillful war took place.
6::86::21::Indrajith witnessed Hanuman, the foremost of Vanaras without weapons, fearlessly fighting.
6::86::22::Thus Indrajith spoke to the charioteer This Vanara will no doubt reduce the Rakshasa army if we keep waiting.
6::86::23::On hearing Indrajith who is highly difficult to encounter speaking in that way his charioteer drove Indrajith, to that place, where Maruthi was.
6::86::24::Going near Hanuman, that dreadful Rakshasa, rained arrows, spears, swords and iron bars on the face of Hanuman.
6::86::25::Receiving those frightening weapons, Maruthi spoke these words overcome by anger.
6::86::26::Evil minded hero! Fight with me back having met, you shall not return alive.
6::86::27::Fight with me for a duel war if you like. Come quickly and with stand, then you will become foremost among Rakshasas.
6::86::28::Vibheeshana told Lakshmana that Indarjith having seated is ready to attack Hanuman.
6::86::29::Ravana's son, the conqueror of Indra, having taken a se at in the chariot seeks to kill Hanuman.
6::86::30::O Saumithri! Kill that son of Ravana with your formidable weapons of incomparable craftsmanship, dreadful arrows capable of killing enemies.
6::86::31::Spoken in that way by Vibheeshana, the terror of enemies, the great selfLakshmana saw Indrajith resembling a mountain seated in the chariot and was difficult to approach.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेअदिकव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषडशीतितमस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the eighty sixth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
