6::124::1::Rising in the morning after comfortable rest that night, Vibheeshana saw Rama the subduer of enemies, offered salutations and asked him of the victory and spoke.
6::124::2::These lotus petal eyed women well versed in decoration are at your service. They are willing to assist you in bath. There are cosmetics for anointing your body, and clothes as well as ornaments, sandal paste etc. for you. There are garlands of several types here.
6::124::3::When Vibheeshana had spoken like that, Kakuthsa Rama replied 'you and monkeys headed by Sugriva bathe and come.'
6::124::4::Mighty armed Bharata, righteous, giving up comforts of delicate body, resorting to truth is distressed for my cause.
6::124::5::When the virtuous Bharata, son of Kaikeyi, is not here, why do I need bath, why so many clothes and ornaments?
6::124::6:: As it is very difficult to return to that city, think of the path to depart.
6::124::7::When Rama had spoken in the aforesaid manner, Vibheeshana replied O son of the ruler of the earth! I will make you reach Ayodhya in a day.
6::124::8:: An aerial car called Pushpaka, a wonderful one, which closely resembles the sun, which goes according to the will of the rider has been retained with me. It was earned by Ravana from my brother Kubera in a combat. Be auspicious. O Rama, of unequal prowess, this is retained for your cause.
6::124::9::This aerial car which waits here which resembles a cloud, will take you to Ayodhya. Be fearless.
6::124::10::O Wise Rama! If you permit me, and think kindly of me and remember me, and if you have affection for me stay here for a while.
6::124::11::Rama, if all your requirements are met and you are satisfied, then you can start with your brother Lakshmana and wife Vaidehi.
6::124::12::Rama, you should accept this hospitality from me at this one occasion, which has been arranged with affection to the army and host of friends.
6::124::13::I request you out of my high esteem towards you and friendliness. I am your servant and not commanding you to do so.
6::124::14::On hearing Vibheeshana spoken in the aforesaid manner, Rama replied to the hearing of Rakshasas, Vanaras and all of them there.
6::124::15::O tormentor of enemies! Hero, I am honoured by your friendship, by your efforts, and good heartedness of all of you.
6::124::16::Ruler of Rakshasas! Not accepting your request will surely not happen. (but) my mind is hastening to see my brother Bharata.
6::124::17::He came to Chitrakuta and on reaching bent down obediently, begged me by his words to return which I did not do. Kausalya, Sumithra and Kaikeyi and Guha also requested and the request of the citizens has been turned down.
6::124::18::Noble Vibheeshana! Please permit me to go. I am honoured by you, my friend. Do not be angry or feel sorry. Let me do my duty.
6::124::19::O Ruler of Rakshasas, send for my aerial car. My task has been completed here. How can I continue to stay here?
6::124::20::Rama having spoken that way, Vibheeshana the king of Rakshasas, hurriedly ordered for the aerial car. The aerial car Pushpaka's parts were decorated with golden pictures, its altars were made of cat's eye gems, its squares were fixed with pillars and shone like silver. It was surrounded on all sides with yellow pennons. It had posts and flags all over, decorated with golden lotuses. The mansions in Pushpak had networks scattered with eyeholes set with pearls like windows. It had rows of bells, surrounded on all sides which had sweet sound. The Pushpak constructed by Viswakarma was huge like mountain Meru's peak and decorated with silver and pearls. Its pavements were fixed with crystals and encrusted with cat's eye gems. The seats were excellent and had rich coverings.
6::124::21::The Pushpak which could not be assailed was endowed with mind speed. Vibheeshana presented it to Rama and stood.
6::124::22::Then Saumithri, lofty  minded Rama took seats in the aerial car Pushpaka which rides at the will of the rider. They were astonished at the size of Pushpak, which was huge like a mountain.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेचतुर्विंशत्युत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of one hundred and twenty fourth sarga of the Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
