6::31::1::There upon the spies described the unshakeable army of Raghava staying at Suvela mountain, to the king of Lanka.
6::31::2::Having heard from the spies that Rama has come with mighty force, Ravana got perturbed and said to the ministers.
6::31::3::The time has come for us to call for all the rakshasas and ministers immediately and assemble (said Ravana).
6::31::4::Having been ordered (by Ravana) that way, the ministers along with Rakshasas instantly reached and he started to think with them.
6::31::5::Thereafter, thinking about what is appropriate to do, unassailable Ravana dispensed his ministers and entered his own residence.
6::31::6::Then Ravana of extraordinary skills sent for Vidyujihvam, a learned one in conjuring tricks and went from there to Mythili.
6::31::7::Rakshasa king Ravana said to Vidyujihvam who knew conjuring tricks, We will cheat Sita, daughter of Janaka by a trick.
6::31::8::O Night ranger! You make an illusory head of Raghava and come and stand at me holding an arrow with great bow.
6::31::9::When the Rakshasa king had spoken that way to Vidyujihvam, he said, Be it so. Pleased with the dexterous production of Vidyujihvam, Ravana presented to him a beautiful ornament.
6::31::10::Eager to have a look at Sita, the mighty king of Rakshasas entered Asoka grove.
6::31::11::Thereafter, the younger brother of Kubera (Ravana) saw sad Sita, who did not deserve that piteous condition, who had been reduced to sorrowful state, seated on the ground in Asoka grove, with her head bent down filled with sorrow contemplating on her husband alone.
6::31::12::While she was guarded by dreadful Rakshasa women surrounding her closely, Ravana went near her happily and saw her. He addressed Sita praising her.
6::31::13::O Auspicious one! However, much I have requested you, you did not care for me seeking your husband. Raghava, who killed Khara, has been killed in war.
6::31::14::O Sita! All your roots have been crushed by me. Give up your vanity. By your own accord, you become my wife.
6::31::15::O Foolish one! Give up these thoughts from your mind. What will you do with your deceased husband? O auspicious one! You are the queen of all my wives.
6::31::16::O woman of less merit! You are one who has given up all worldly actions. Stupid one! You pretend as if you know everything. O Sita! Hear about your husband 's death like that of Vrthasura.
6::31::17::Raghava led by the huge army force of the Vanara king has arrived on the seashore.
6::31::18::And when the Sun moved towards the west, Rama encamped on the northern shore of the sea with a huge army to strike.
6::31::19::After having walked all the way they slept well and when they were sleeping at midnight, we found out all about them by sending prime spies.
6::31::20::There in that camp Lakshmana and Rama are killed by my powerful army led by Prahastha at night.
6::31::21::Again, and again lifting spears, iron bars, javelins, huge staffs, sparkling maces, shining iron mallets and clubs, lances and strong Musalas, the Rakshasas hurled at Vanaras.
6::31::22::There after the head of Rama, who was sleeping, was severed by Prahastha, skilled at striking, with a big sword without any feeling of attachment.
6::31::23::When Vibheeshana rose up he was caught by chance. Lakshmana and Vanaras fled in all directions.
6::31::24::O Sita! Vanara Lord Sugriva with his neck broken, Hanuman with chin broken were killed by Rakshasas and are lying down fallen on the ground.
6::31::25::And while Jambavan was rising on his knees, he was struck by many iron bars in comb at and had fallen down like a tree.
6::31::26::Mainda and Dwivida of huge bodies, who are slayers of enemies, the bulls among Vanaras are breathing hard, and bathed in blood roaring, having been cutin the middle of their body.
6::31::27::Panasa is lying down on earth like jackfruit. Darimukha is lying down shattered by many arrows. Brilliant Kumuda too is torn off and silently lying down.
6::31::28::By the many arrows of Rakshasas reaching towards Angada, he lies down chopped up and destroyed, with his armlets dropped down throwing up blood.
6::31::29::There, some of the sleeping Vanaras were crushed by elephants, so also, just as by the speed of wind the clouds are crushed the Vanaras are crushed to death.
6::31::30::Some were followed behind as they were speeding like lions and mighty elephants afflicted and frightened, struck by Rakshasas.
6::31::31::While a few Vanaras dived into the sea, some took refuge in the sky. Resorting to their natural way the Bears climbed the trees.
6::31::32::Many fierceeyed Rakshasas killed several Vanaras on the shore of the ocean, in the mountains and woods.
6::31::33::In that way the army of your husband has been killed by Rakshasa army and his decayed head drenched in blood covered with dust has been brought.
6::31::34::Then Ravana, the highly unassailable king of Rakshasas spoke these words to the hearing of Sita.
6::31::35::Bring that Rakshasa, Vidyujihvam of cruel deeds who brought Rama's head from the battlefield.
6::31::36::Then holding the head along with the bow, Vidyujihvam bowed his head down in salutation and stood in front of Ravana.
6::31::37::Then the king, Ravana spoke to Vidyujihvam, the Rakshasa with extended tongue, who stood close by.
6::31::38::At once place the head of Dasaratha's son before that piteous woman. Let her see the ultimate status attained by her husband at the end (said Ravana).
6::31::39::Having spoken immediately placed the head of Rama that was pleasing to see, by the side of Sita and went away.
6::31::40::Thus addressed Ravana casting down the bright great bow that is famous in the three worlds.
6::31::41::Prahastha has brought this bow duly tied with the string after killing human Rama in the night.
6::31::42::Then Ravana placing that head brought by Vidyujihvam and the famous bow on the ground said to the daughter of the king of Videha, Now you may submit to my will.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकत्रिंशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the thirty first sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
