6::45::1::Rama, the son of the king, a powerful and strong warrior, ordered ten Vanaras to know the whereabouts (of Indrajith).
6::45::2::Rama, the scorcher of enemies, ordered the two sons of Sushena, the best of Vanaras Neela, Jambavantha, Angada, as well as courageous Sarabha, Vinatha, and Hanumantha and Sanuprastha endowed with extraordinary might, also Rshaba and Rshaba Skanda.
6::45::3::All those monkeys, exceedingly rejoiced, held huge trees, and went in ten directions searching and sprang to the sky.
6::45::4::Ravana's son being skilled in the use of weapons and an expert in mystic powers, he prohibited the speed of the Vanaras with his swift arrows.
6::45::5::The Vanaras were mangled with iron arrows, however endowed with high speed they could not make out Indrajith in utter darkness just as the sun covered by clouds.
6::45::6::Indrajith who is ever victorious, pierced repeatedly arrows all over the body of Rama and Lakshmana.
6::45::7::Both Rama and Lakshmana were pierced by furious Indrajith with serpents like arrows furious.
6::45::8::Both Rama and Lakshmana bleeding excessively, wounded profusely, looked bright and red like Kimsuka trees with flowers.
6::45::9::Then Ravana's son with the corner of his eyes turned red in anger looking like a huge collyrium, vanished from there and spoke these words to the two brothers, Rama, and Lakshmana.
6::45::10::Indrajith who had fire like eyes, said, even the ruler of gods cannot discern while I am fighting war, why speak about you? It is not possible.
6::45::11::Raghava brothers! You are enmeshed with plumes of arrows all over the body. My anger will not go waste. I will send you to the abode of Yama, the Lord of death.
6::45::12::Indrajith having spoken to the righteous brothers Rama and Lakshmana in that way, began to pain them with arrows and stood rejoiced roaring aloud.
6::45::13::Indrajith who was like a mass of crushed black hill, mounting the huge bow released terrific arrows again and again in that great conflict.
6::45::14::There after that warrior went on digging sharp arrows into the vital parts of Rama and Lakshmana again and again and kept roaring.
6::45::15::In a fraction of a second, both Rama and Lakshmana facing the battle were bound by arrows and did not have energy to retaliate.
6::45::16::Pierced all over their bodies with the heads of arrows, the gallant princes freed themselves from the cords by shaking violently like the banners of Indra. Pained by the hurting of the vital parts of both the princes, the Lords of the world fell.
6::45::17::The princes were lying on the warrior's bed in the battlefield, their limbs fully covered with arrows, in a highly distressed state.
6::45::18::Not an inch of space on their bodies remained without being pierced. Not even a part of the body was left unshaken, unhurt, or wounded.
6::45::19::Wounded by the cruel Rakshasas capable of changing form at their will, blood flowed from their body copiously like water from spring bringing out their vital life breaths.
6::45::20::Rama fell first pierced by arrows in his vital parts released in anger by Indrajith, by whom Indra was utterly defeated.
6::45::21::Indrajith pierced Rama with arrows coated with gold and gold tipped arrows, which had even and circular heads, with halfmoon arrows, with axe like heads, heads like joined palms, heads resembling teeth of calf and lion teeth arrows as well as razor sharp arrows which descended quickly unobstructed like dust.
6::45::22::Rama lay relaxed on the hero's bed quitting his goldplated bow strung and bent at both ends, and the middle.
6::45::23::Lakshmana remained beholding the best of men fallen at an arrow's throw disappointed at his life.
6::45::24::Lakshmana grieved seeing his elder brother Rama pierced by arrows, pained, and fallen on the ground.
6::45::25::Even the monkeys' eyes were filled with tears, very much stricken with grief seeing Rama fallen and shrieked.
6::45::26::Hanuman's army of Vanaras collected together stood surrounding fallen princes lying on the ground, despondent and extremely sorrowful.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेपञ्चचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the forty fifth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
