6::70::1::Seeing the bulls among Rakshasas Naranthaka, Devanthaka, Trisira and Mahodara a scion of Paulastya and Mahodara, killed the Rakshasas cried aloud.
6::70::2::Mahodara who closely resembled a cloud, mounted on the best of elephants chased brave and courageous son of Vali.
6::70::3::Then, powerful Devanthaka who was immersed in grief of his brother, taking hold of a glowing iron bar rushed forward towards Angada.
6::70::4::Then Trisira, seated on the chariot, effulgent as the Sun, yoked to the best horse marched towards Angada.
6::70::5::Angada observed that all the three chiefs of Rakshasas, who were capable of crushing the pride of gods marching towards him and uprooted a huge tree.
6::70::6::Just as Indra took a flaming thunderbolt, Angada, the hero took hold of huge branches of trees and hurled at Devanthaka with force.
6::70::7::Trisira split the trees with the arrows which were like venomous serpents. Observing Angada's action he flew up.
6::70::8::Then the leader of the monkeys, rained trees and rocks. Angry Trisira attacked all of them with sharp arrows.
6::70::9::Mahodara shattered those trees with the iron clubs. Trisira attacked brave Angada with arrows.
6::70::10::Mahodara chased the elephant on to Angada in anger and attacked him on his chest with his iron clubs.
6::70::11::Then infuriated Devanthaka quickly came over Angada directly and attacked him with his iron club and retreated.
6::70::12::Eminent and highly energetic son of Vali did not feel perturbed when three of the foremost Rakshasas attacked him together.
6::70::13::Angada, who was endowed with high speed, and exceedingly difficult to encounter, jumped up the huge elephant of Mahodara attacked him.
6::70::14::By that blow of Angada, that king of elephant's eyes dropped, and it cried.
6::70::15::Mighty son of Vali removed the tusk of the elephant and hit Devanthaka with it by jumping over him in the battlefield.
6::70::16::That astonishing Rakshasa shaken like a tree, thrown by the wind, shed huge amounts of blood which was of the colour of lacquer.
6::70::17::Thereafter the terribly strong Devanthaka taking iron spike quickly pierced Angada.
6::70::18::Then, hurt by the club the son of Vanara king fell down on his knees once again and got up.
6::70::19::While Angada was getting up, Trisira again hit him on the forehead with three straight going arrows.
6::70::20::Then finding Angada surrounded by the three Rakshasa leaders, Hanuman as well as Neela set out.
6::70::21::Thereafter Neela hit Trisira with the peak of the mountain and Ravana's son broke the mountain into pieces with arrows.
6::70::22::Hit by hundreds of arrows, the mountain peak broke into pieces of stones like sparks and flames fell from it.
6::70::23::Mighty Devanthaka, observing (Trisira's action), was happy on the battlefield, and went with his club to assault Hanuman.
6::70::24::Then the son of wind god, Hanuman observing Devanthaka coming towards him, got up and hit him on the forehead with his thunderbolt like fist.
6::70::25::When the heroic and strong son of the wind god hit on the head of Devanthaka, the Rakshasas trembled by the sound of the great monkey 's blow.
6::70::26::Devanthaka's skull was shattered by the blow, and his teeth, eyes and tongue were forced out, the son of Rakshasa king fell dead on the ground.
6::70::27::Devanthaka, the foremost of Rakshasa warriors, an enemy of gods, endowed with great strength, having been killed in the conflict, Trisira became angry and rained arrows on Neela's chest.
6::70::28::Mahodara got enraged, mounted on an elephant just as the Sun went over Mandara mountain and went for war. Then Mahodara wielding bow rained arrows, just as rainy clouds with lightning and rainbows showers rain, on the mountain like chest of Neela.
6::70::29::Neela's body wetted by arrows all over, the limbs pierced with arrows, the monkey leader remained powerless and could not move in spite of being extraordinarily strong.
6::70::30::Thereafter Neela also regained his senses and uprooting a mountain filled with trees went over Mahodara at high speed and attacked him on the forehead.
6::70::31::Then smashed by the impact of the mountain, along with his elephant Mahodara's body fell to the ground. Released from life, he fell like a mountain struck with lightning.
6::70::32::Trisira got enraged seeing his uncle killed, seized his bow and with a sharp arrow pierced Hanuman.
6::70::33::The son of the wind god in anger hurled a top of the mountain on mighty Trisira, who split the mountain into several pieces with an arrow.
6::70::34::Then seeing that the top of the mountain hurled was ineffective in that battle over Ravana's son, Hanuman discharged rain of trees.
6::70::35::Stupendous Trisira tore with his whetted arrows the rain of trees through the sky and roared.
6::70::36::Then Hanuman also jumped up in anger and tore the horse off Trisira just as the lion would tear the lordly elephant with nails.
6::70::37::In the same manner, Trisira, the son of Ravana sprung up and seized a javelin, just as God of death in dark night and hurled at the son of wind god and shattered.
6::70::38::Hanuman, the best of monkeys, snapped the javelin flung by Trisira on him, which came down unobstructed like a meteor from heaven and the monkeys roared.
6::70::39::Seeing the dreadful form of shattered javelin, all Vanaras rejoiced and thundered like rain clouds.
6::70::40::Trisira, the foremost of Rakshasas then lifted his sword, placed it on the chest of Hanuman and dug into it.
6::70::41::Heroic Hanuman hit by Trisira, attacked him with his palm on the chest.
6::70::42::Trisira, a highly energetic one, hit by Hanuman with his palm, dropped the weapon from his hand, lost his senses and fell on the ground.
6::70::43::Taking the sword from Trisira, as he was falling, the great Vanara who resembled a mountain roared, creating terror in all, surrounded there.
6::70::44::Unable to bear that roar, that Rakshasa got up jumping and struck Hanuman with his fist.
6::70::45::The great monkey hit by the fist (of Trisira) became furious and in anger he got hold of Trisira's head with crown.
6::70::46::Enraged wind god's son, cut off the three heads of Trisira adorned with earrings just as Indra cut off the heads of Vishwarupa, son of Twashta.
6::70::47::The heads of Trisira, an enemy of Indra, resembling mountains with incongruous eyes glowing like Vyshvanara's eyes, fell into wilderness like stars fallen from the path of Sun.
6::70::48::Trisira, the enemy of gods, endowed with the prowess of Indra got killed by Hanuman. The earth shook, the monkeys roared and the Rakshasas from all sides took to their heels.
6::70::49::Witnessing Trisira killed, earlier Mahodara also, Devanthaka and Naranthaka who are difficult to encounter killed, monkeys roared in joy seeing that Matta became very angry.
6::70::50::Mahaparsva seized hold of a good venerable, allpowerful mace plated with gold, smeared with flesh and blood, shining with lustre, shining red with enemy's blood, an effulgent one whose head has been glowing decorated with red flower garlands that brought terror to Airavatam, Mahapadma, and Sarvabhuama, the three elephants guarding the three of the four quarters.
6::70::51::Matta, the Rakshasa leader became very furious and took hold of the mace glowing like fire, at the time of dissolution of the universe and scattered the monkeys.
6::70::52::Rshaba, the bull among Vanaras endowed with prowess, springing up came and stood in front of Mahaparsva.
6::70::53::Again, seeing Rshaba standing in front like a mountain, enraged Mahaparsva hit him on the chest with the mace that was like a thunderbolt.
6::70::54::Hit in that way by the mace, Rshaba, bull of Vanaras, with chest broken, blood flowed excessively.
6::70::55::Regaining consciousness after a long time the monkey chief, Rshaba, was angry, his lips quivering as he was, ran to Mahaparsva.
6::70::56::The chief of the Vanaras, whose form was like a mountain, endowed with speed, got up quickly, duly, and forcibly hit the Rakshasa (Mahaparsva) in the space between his arms.
6::70::57::Like a tree whose roots have been severed, the Rakshasa fell on the ground. Then seizing forcibly, the dreadful mace that resembled the rod of Lord of death he roared.
6::70::58::For a short while, Mahaparsva, the enemy of gods remained as if life had gone off up and struck the son of waters (Rshaba).
6::70::59::The monkey was unconscious for a while having fallen on the ground. Regaining senses, overcoming, took up the mace which looked like the rock of a foremost mountain and struck him (Mahaparsva) on the battlefield.
6::70::60::He (Rshaba) reached the body of the ferocious enemy of gods and brahmins. He split his chest with his mace and the timid Rakshasa shed blood just as Himalaya Mountain discharges water.
6::70::61::The great Rakshasa Mahaparsva went towards the mace held by Rshaba, the great soul. Taking hold of the mace, Rshaba struck the Rakshasa again and again and pierced him in the forefront of the battlefield.
6::70::62::Shattered by his own mace, Matta (Mahaparsva), whose eyes had been crushed, had fallen like a mountain struck by lightning.
6::70::63::Strength gone, life ceased, eyes crushed, his own Rakshasas fallen on the ground, the Rakshasa army fled.
6::70::64::When Ravana's brother was killed, the ocean of Rakshasas left the battlefield for the sake of their own life, and it looked as if the ocean had burst into shores.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेसप्ततितमस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the seventieth sarga Of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
