6::24::1::व्यवस्थिता settled, सा that, वीरसमितिः army of Vanaras, राज्ञा by the king (Rama), शुभनक्षत्रा with auspicious stars, शारदी autumn, पौर्णमासी full moon, शशिनाइव like the moon, विरराज shone.
6::24::2::सागरवर्चसा like the ocean, तेन by that, बलौघेन the army, पीड्यमाना tormented by, वसुन्धरा the earth, वेगेन swift movement, त्रस्ता frightened, प्रचचाल started shaking.
6::24::3::ततः there upon, काननौकसः army having settled, लङ्कायां from Lanka, आक्रुष्टम् terrific, तुमुलम् tumultuous, रेमहर्षणम् that which causes horripilation, भेरीमृदङ्गसङ्घुष्टम् drums and percussion instruments, शुश्रुवुः came to hear.
6::24::4::हरियूथपाः leaders of Vanara troops, तेन of that (Lanka), घोषेण by the loud noises, संहृष्टाः felt very happy, बभूवुः became, तम् that which, घोषम् noise, अमृष्यमाणाः unable to tolerate, घोषवत्तरम् louder than the noise, विनेदुः roared in joy.
6::24::5::राक्षसाःअपि even the Rakshasas, दृप्तानाम् in their pride, प्लवङ्गनाम् the Vanaras, अम्बरे in the sky, नर्दताम् bellowing, मेघानाम् clouds, स्वनम् इव like the sound, गर्जितम् roared, शुश्रुवुःच heard.
6::24::6::दाशरधिः Rama the son of Dasaratha, चित्रध्वजपताकिनीम् adored with colourful flags and posts, लङ्काम् of Lanka, दृष्टवा seeing, दूयमानेन afflicted by sorrow, चेतसा thinking, सीताम् of Sita, मनसा in his mind, जगाम went about.
6::24::7::मृगशाबाक्षी doveeyed, सा she, लोहिताङ्गेन red colour bodied planet (Mars), ग्रहेणव caught by, अभिभूता conquered, रोहिणीव like Rohini, रावणेन by Ravana, अत्र there, उपरुध्यते obstructed.
6::24::8::वीरः heroic one, दीर्घम् long, उष्णंच hot, निश्वस्य heaving, लक्ष्मणम् to Lakshmana, समुद्वीक्ष्यच and looking at, आत्मनः himself, तात्कालहितम् that which is good at that time, वचनम् words, उवाच spoke.
6::24::9::लक्ष्मण Lakshmana, विश्वकर्मणा by Vishwakarma, नगाग्रे on top of the mountain, मनसा with mind, कृताम् इव like the one created, उत्थिताम् elevated, आकाशम् sky, आलिखन्तीम् as if clasping, लङ्काम् Lanka, पश्य you may see.
6::24::10::भुवि existing, राजते appears splendid, लङ्का Lanka, बहुभि with many, विमानैः tall skyscrapers, सङ्कीर्णा mass of, विष्णोः of Vishnu's, पदम् path, आकाशम् the sky, पाण्डुभिः with white, घनैः clouds, छादितम् इव as if covered.
6::24::11::लङ्का Lanka, नानापतगसङ्घुष्टै: with flocks of bird of several kinds singing sweetly फलपुष्पोपगैः with charming flowers and fruits, शुभैः auspicious (gardens), पुष्पितैः decorated with flowers, चित्ररथोपमैः like the Chaitraratha, वनैः gardens, शोभिता delighting.
6::24::12::शिवः pleasant, अनिलः breeze, मत्तविहङ्गानि inhabited by proud birds प्रलीनभ्रमराणीच drunken honeybees, कोकिलाकुलषण्डानि crowded with cuckoos and other birds, दोधवीति shaking violently, पश्य you may see (said Rama to Lakshmana).
6::24::13::दाशरथिः Dasaratha's, रामः Rama, इतिलक्ष्मणम् thus to Lakshmana, समभाषत talked, तद्वै in that manner, शास्त्रदृष्टेन in accordance with what is said in sastras, कर्मणा the task, बलं army, विभजच्छ and divide.
6::24::14::शशास terror for the enemies, वीर्यवान् valiant one, दुर्जयः one who is difficult to win over, अङ्गदः Angada, बलात् with his army, ताम् those, कपिसेनायाम् army of Vanaras, आदाय taking, नीलेनसह along with Nila, उरसि heart (central place), तिष्ठेत् remain.
6::24::15::ऋषभोवानरर्षभ: Rshaba a bull among Vanaras, वानरौघसमावृतः accompanied by his troop of Vanaras, वानरवाहिन्याः Vanara contingent, दक्षिणम् south, पार्श्वम् side, आश्रितः approaching, तिष्ठेत् remain.
6::24::16::गन्धहस्तीव like a proud elephant, दुर्धर्षः difficult to conquer, तरस्वी strong one, गन्धमादनः Gandhamadana, वानरवाहिन्याः Vanara battalion, सव्यंपार्श्वम् right side, समाश्रितः assemble, तिष्ठेत् remain.
6::24::17::अहम् myself, लक्ष्मणेन along with Lakshmana, समन्वितः alert, युक्त: appropriate, मूर्ध्नि at the head, स्थास्यामि will remain, जाम्बवांश्च Jambavan and also, सुषेणश्च Sushena, वानरः Vanaras, वेगदर्शीच quick at sighting, महात्मानः great ones, ते those, त्रयः three, ऋक्षमुख्याः chiefs of Bears, कुक्षिम् the belly part, रक्षन्तु remain protecting.
6::24::18::तेजसा brilliant, आवृतः covered, प्रचेताः Pracheta, लोकस्य world's, पश्चार्धमिव as if ruling the west, कपिराजः king of Vanaras, कपिसेनायाः Vanara army's, जघम् hips and loins, अभिरक्षु let him protect.
6::24::19::सुविभक्तमहाव्यूहा organized that way in the protection of Vanaras, महावानररक्षिता protected the army of Vanaras, साअनीकिनी that army force, साभ्रसम्प्लवा mass of clouds, द्यौःइव like the heavens विबभौ shone.
6::24::20::वानराः Vanaras, गिरशृङ्काणि with peaks of mountains, महतः great, महीरुहान् huge trees, प्रगृह्य seizing, रणे in war, विमर्धयिषवः smash, लङ्काम् to Lanka, आशेदुः resolved.
6::24::21::एनाम् thus, लङ्काम् that Lanka, शिखरैः with peaks, मुष्टिभिरेववा or with bare fists, विकिराम crush it to powder, इतिसर्वे thus all, हरिपुङ्गवाः Vanara leaders, मनांसि determined in their mind, दधिरे hold, स्म indeed.
6::24::22::ततः there upon, महातेज splendid, रामः Rama, सुग्रीवम् Sugriva's, इदम् , thus, अब्रवीत् spoke, सैन्यानि the army, सुविभक्तानि the divided, एषः thus, शुकः Suka, विमुच्यताम् relieved.
6::24::23::महाबल mighty, वानरेन्द्रः king of Vanaras, रामस्य Rama's, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा having heard, रामस्य Rama's, शासनात् by the instruction, तंदूतम् that envoy, शुकम् happy, मोचयामास was relieved.
6::24::24::वानरैः by Vanaras, निपीडितः tormented, रामवाक्येन by Rama's word, मोचितः relieved, शुकः Suka, परमसन्त्रप्त highly terrified, रक्षोधिपम् to the king of Rakshasas, उपागमत् returned.
6::24::25::रावणः Ravana, प्रहसन्नेव laughing, शुकम् at Suka, वाक्यम् these words, उवाचह spoken, ते to you, इमौ these, पक्षौसीतौकिम् why are your wings fastened? , लूनपक्षश्चकूड even your wings have been clipped, दृश्यसे it appears, त्वम् you, अनेकचित्तानाम् fickle minded, तेषाम् their, वशम् clutches, नआगतः not fallen under कच्चित् I suppose.
6::24::26::ततः then, भयसंविग्नः caught by fear, सः he, तदा then, राज्ञा by king, चोदितः directed, राक्षसाधिपम् Ravana, उत्तमम् excellent, इदम these, वचनम् words, प्रत्युवाच replied, सागरस्य ocean's, उत्तरेतीरे northern bank श्लक्ष्णया gently, गिरा speech, सान्त्वयन् trembling, यथासन्देशम् as conveyed by you, अक्लिष्टम् , ते you, वचनम् words, तथा like that, अब्रवम् told.
6::24::27::दृष्टमात्रः as soon as they saw, अहम् me, क्रुद्धै enraged, तैःप्लवङ्गमैः those monkeys, उत्प्लुत्य rising up, गृहीतःअस्मि taking hold of me, अपिच and also, मुष्टिभिः with fists, हन्तुम् to slay, लोप्तुंच and injuring, आरब्दः started.
6::24::28::राक्षसाधिप king of Rakshasas, ते to you, सम्भाषितुम् to negotiate, नशक्याः was not possible, अत्र there, सम्प्रश्नः to question, नलम्यते had no opportunity, वानराः Vanaras, प्रकृत्या by nature, कोपनाः are violent, तीक्ष्णाः highly furious.
6::24::29::विराधस्य Viradha's, कबन्धस्य Kabhanda's, खरस्य Khara's, हन्ता life was taken, सःरामः by that Rama, सुग्रीवसहितः accompanied by Sugriva, सीताया: Sita's, पदम् set foot into, आगतः arrived.
6::24::30::एषः such, राघवः Raghava, सागरे on the ocean, सेतुम् bridge, कृत्वा having crossed, लवणोदधिम् salt sea, तीर्त्वाच shore of, रक्षां Rakshasas, विर्दूय distancing, धन्वी wielding a bow, तिष्ठति stands.
6::24::31::गिरिमेघनिकाशानाम् resembling mountains and clouds, ऋक्षवानरसङ्घानाम् army of Bears and Vanaras, सहस्रशः in thousands, अनीकानि an army force, वसुन्धराम् on the land, छादयन्ति settled.
6::24::32::राक्षसां Rakshasas, बलौघस्य for Bears, वानरेन्द्रबलस्यच for army of Vanara king's, एतयोः for both of them, देवदानवयोरिव like for gods and demons, सन्धि: alliance, नविद्यते not possible.
6::24::33::प्राकारम् boundary, पुरा of the city, आयान्ति will reach, क्षिप्रम् at once, एकतरम् one of the two, कुरु do, अस्मै you may, आसु give back, सीताम् Sita, प्रयच्छवा or implore you, सुयुद्धम् वापि or give good battle, प्रदीयताम् I suggest you
6::24::34::रावणः Ravana, शुकस्य Suka's, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा having heard, रोषसंरक्तनयनः with angry red eyes, चक्षुषा from his eyes, निर्दहन्निव as if he would burn with his glance, वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवित् spoke.
6::24::35::देवगन्धर्वदानवाः gods, Gandharvas and demons, माम् with me, प्रतियुध्येरन्नपि even if come to wage war, सर्वलोकभयादपि even if all worlds threaten me, सीताम् Sita, नावप्रदास्यामि I shall not give away.
6::24::36::मामकाः my, शराः arrows, राघवम् to Raghava वसन्ते spring season, पुष्पितम् blossoms, पादपम् trees, मत्ताः drunken, ब्रमराःइव like the bees, कदा when, समभिधावन्ति would attack.
6::24::37::दीप्तै: glowing, तूणीयशै: from the famed quiver, कार्मुकच्युतैः fit to pierce, गणश: thousands of, शरैः darts, येन by which, कुञ्जरम् elephant, उल्काभिरिव like the burning sticks, कदाआदीपयामि when will I able to goad.
6::24::38::उद्यन् rising, दिवाकरः Sun, सर्वेषाम् of all, ज्योतिषाम् light, प्रभामिव like the radiance, महता great, बलेन army, वृतः surrounded by, अस्य his, तत् that, बलम् strength, आदास्ये obscure.
6::24::39::मे I, वेगः speed, सागरस्येव like the ocean, मे I, गति: swiftness, मारुतस्येव like the WindGod, दाशरथिः Dasaratha's son, नहिवेद not know, तेव that is why, माम् with me, योध्दुम् to wage war, इच्छति desiring.
6::24::40::सविषान् the poisonous, पन्नगानिव serpents like, तूणीशयान् in my quiver, मेबाणान् my arrows, रामः Rama, सङ्ग्रामे in battle, नपश्यति has not seen, तेन therefore, माम् with me, योध्दुम् combat, इच्छति desiring.
6::24::41::सःराघवः that Rama, पुरा in the past, युद्धे in war, मम my, वीर्यम् valour, नजानाति not known, अहम् I, रणे in war, ताम् them, मम my, आहितवाहिनीम् entering the enemy's army, महारङ्गम् formidable Veena, अवगाह्य holding, शरकोणैः by the sharp heads of arrows, प्रवादिताम् makes sounds of challenge, ज्याशब्दतुमुलाम् that tumultuous noise, घोराम् terrific, आर्तभीतमहास्वनाम् high sound caused by the destitute and frightened ones, नाराचतलंसन्नादाम् its sound like that of iron arrows, चापमयीम् with that bow in hand, मम of mine, वीणाम् Veena, वादयिष्यामि will play.
6::24::42::सहस्रचक्षुषा thousand eyed one, Indra, वासवेनानिपि even god of water, पुन: again, वरुणेनापि for Varuna also, युध्दे in war, यमेनवा if he is god of death, Yama also, महाहवे great fire, स्वयम् himself, वैश्रवणेनवा even if he be Lord of wealth Kubera, शराग्निना by my arrows, शक्यः possible, न not.
