6::1::1::Having heard Hanuman's words, full of love, Rama replied. 
6::1::2::Hanuman You have performed a mighty task indeed, which is difficult even to think of in this world and not possible for any one else on this earth.  
6::1::3::None else than Garuda or Vayu have I seen to have crossed this great ocean crossed by you, Hanuman.
6::1::4::Indeed, who has the strength to return alive after entering that city highly protected by Ravana. It is unimaginable even for devas, danavas, yakshas, gandharvas, uragas and rakshasas to cross.
6::1::5::Except for Hanuman, who is abounding in valour and strength, it is not possible for others to enter the inaccessible Lanka highly protected by rakshasas.
6::1::6::Hanuman, with his mighty form and valour not only carried out a great task assigned by Sugriva but also what had to be done as duty. 
6::1::7::He, who carries out  a formidable task entrusted to him by the master, with love is  said to be the best among men.
6::1::8::An efficient servant does not only do what is asked but also does the work dear to the king. One who does not do so is said to be mediocre.
6::1::9::If one who is capable and efficient has been entrusted with a task by a king and fails to do the work agreed to, is said to be a lowly person.
6::1::10::Having done the task assigned to him, Hanuman carried out what had to be done and accomplished without difficulty. This made Sugriva also happy.  
6::1::11::On Hanuman finding Vaidehi, I and, mighty Lakshmana and the whole of Raghu dynasty are now rightfully protected.
6::1::12::On the other hand, it is a pity that I am not able to please such a person who has spoken pleasing words. Further this causes grief to me.
6::1::13::To such a great one who attained success at this time, everything can be given. I give my embrace.  
6::1::14::Having said so, Rama experienced the joy of love all over his body and embraced Hanuman who returned successful.
6::1::15::Rama, the delight of Raghu dynasty thought over and said while Sugriva, the lord of monkeys was still listening.
6::1::16::By all means good work was done in searching for Sita. On the contrary, having succeeded, my mind is once again agitated when I think of (crossing) the ocean.
6::1::17::How will all the monkeys together be able to cross to the southern shore of the vast ocean? It is difficult to cross.
6::1::18::This has been told to me by Vaidehi. How will the monkeys cross the ocean(enquired Vaidehi).
6::1::19::Agitated with sorrow, mighty armed Rama, the destroyer of enemies approached Hanuman and reflected (about the crossing of the ocean).                            इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे प्रथमस्सर्गः This is the end of the first Sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
