6::53::1::The Lord of Rakshasas was overcome with anger on hearing about Dhumraksha's death. He was hissing like a serpent, heaving a deep burning sigh, for having done a dirty task. He spoke to cruel Vajradamshtra of mighty prowess.
6::53::2::O Hero, proceed, accompanied by Rakshasa companions and kill Dasaratha's Rama and Sugriva along with Vanaras.
6::53::3::The king of Rakshasas, being a deceit, having spoken in that way, many generals of the army went accompanied by elephants, horses, camels, and donkeys with chariots decorated with banners and pennons, and diadems collected together.
6::53::4::Thereafter adorned with wonderful crowns studded with keyura gems, wearing a co at covering the body with bow in hand went alert.
6::53::5::The general went ascending the chariot shining with well polished shining gold, decked with flags after going around clockwise.
6::53::6::Armed with swords, many foot soldiers carrying poles, strange clubs, tridents, iron bars, slings and roped to throw spears and spears with sharp edges, swords, battle axes, javelins, and maces, departed.
6::53::7::All the Rakshasa leaders decorated with lovely raiment, glowing, the heroes moved like mountains. They seemed like elephants intoxicated with ichor.
6::53::8::Carrying tridents, clubs, and goads eager for war the Rakshasas mounted on mahouts and horses of noble characteristics, warriors with extraordinary might departed.
6::53::9::Then the entire Rakshasa army determined with a purpose roaring like clouds of the rainy season it looked splendid and crossed over the southern gate where Angada was stationed.
6::53::10::As they were leaving evil portents appeared. Dreadful jackals, dazzling fire from the sky and meteors falling appeared.
6::53::11::Then the fierce animals indicated the death of Rakshasas, who were going deluded with war and fell down.
6::53::12::Mighty Vajradamshtra who was energetic, picking up courage seeing the portents that came up, sallied forth eager for war.
6::53::13::Vanaras who assumed victory, seeing the Rakshasas coming out stretching filled all the ten directions with loud noise.
6::53::14::Then dreadful encounters of fierce form took place between Vanaras and Rakshasas each one trying to kill another.
6::53::15::Proceeding Further, very eager to fight they fell on the ground with their bodies broken, heads severed, and all limbs bathed in blood.
6::53::16::Heroes in war whose hand s were like iron clubs, who never turned back in war, indeed flung weapons of many kinds on one another.
6::53::17::There, a very loud fearful noise was heard which pierced the hearts in the battlefield, that was produced by the striking of weapons with trees and rocks.
6::53::18::Then came out tumultuous sounds of clutter of chariots, bows, conches, kettle drums and tom toms.
6::53::19::Indeed, abandoning the weapons, the Vanaras fought with their palms, fists, feet, trees, and knees and smashed the Rakshasas crushing their bodies like rocks.
6::53::20::Vajradamshtra went about in the battle striking Vanaras just like death goes with a noose for destruction of the world.
6::53::21::Mighty Vajradamshtra, who was endowed with the skill of using every kind of weapon, deluded with anger, went after the Vanara army.
6::53::22::Seeing the Vanaras being destroyed, Vali's son, Angada with redoubled anger, like fire at the time of universal destruction, started to exterminate Rakshasas.
6::53::23::Heroic Angada, equal to Indra in prowess, enraged, eyes turned red in anger, seizing a tree made a fierce fight with Rakshasa army like a lion with small animals.
6::53::24::There, struck by Angada of fearful valour, the Rakshasas fell like trees smashed and heads broken.
6::53::25::Then the wonderful chariots, flags, horses, Vanaras and Rakshasas bodies bathed in blood fell on the ground looked fearful.
6::53::26::The battlefield with strewn armlets, necklaces and clothes, weapons looked like autumnal night decorated all over.
6::53::27::Then the Rakshasa hordes hit by Angada shook violently just as a rain cloud would under wind.।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेत्रिपञ्चाशस्सर्गः।।This is the end of the fifty third sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
