6::65::1::Kumbhakarna having heard Mahodara, warned him not to speak that way and spoke to Ravana, the foremost of Rakshasas.
6::65::2::You know me. I will get rid of your enmity killing the cruel minded Rama. Be fearless and happy now.
6::65::3::Warriors will not roar wastefully like waterless clouds. You will see me roaring after having completed the action.
6::65::4::Warriors do not tolerate even when glorified. They never praise themselves. They accomplish difficult deeds without displaying them.
6::65::5::O Mahodara! Your words of appeal will be accepted as cowardly, devoid of intellect and to those who do not know anything, it looks as if you know.
6::65::6::You, who always fear in combat, are talking pleasingly to the king , going after him happily brought the matter to this state.
6::65::7::The king is left alone in Lanka, which is divested of its wealth, and treasury reduced, and the army destroyed by unfriendly people pretending as good friends around him.
6::65::8::I am setting out in this manner to the battlefield, to overpower the enemies in the battle in order to redeem the mistakes done by all of you.
6::65::9::Wise Kumbhakarna having spoken in that way, the Rakshasa king, Ravana laughed and replied in this way.
6::65::10::O dear! You are an expert in war! This Mahodara is terrified at Rama. He is not desiring war. There is no doubt.
6::65::11::O Kumbhakarna! There is none who is equal to you in might and friendliness at heart towards me. You go and be victorious by killing the enemies.
6::65::12::You are difficult to encounter. You have awakened for the sake of putting an end to the enemy. It is a momentous period for the Rakshasas, O tamer of enemies.
6::65::13::Therefore, taking up trident holding the noose in hand like the God of Death proceed to devour the monkeys as well as the two princes shining like the Sun.
6::65::14::Seeing your form, the Vanaras will run away, Rama and Lakshmana's heart will break.
6::65::15::The highly energetic king of Rakshasas having spoken like that to mighty Kumbhakarna, felt as if he had taken birth again.
6::65::16::The king who knew the valour and mighty strength of Kumbhakarna remained happy like the moon.
6::65::17::The king having spoken these words, mighty Kumbhakarna, pleased with the king's words set forth to fight.
6::65::18::The destroyer of enemies, hurriedly seized a whetted flaming iron dart, embellished with polished gold.
6::65::19::The dart was like Indra's thunderbolt in form and was equal to thunderbolt, capable of destroying Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Yakshas and Pannagas, was like rising fire shining like the face of an enemy. It was sharp, wreathed in garlands of red colour and emitting flame. Kumbhakarna wielding the dart said.
6::65::20::Enraged and angry Kumbhakarna said, I will proceed now. Let my army remain here. I will consume them on keys today.
6::65::21::Hearing Kumbhakarna's words Ravana said, Go with trident, sword and iron bar in hand surrounded by the army.
6::65::22::The Vanaras are gigantic, endowed with speed and determination. They will destroy with their teeth when you are not alert and alone.
6::65::23::Therefore, go surrounded by the army. They are extremely difficult to encounter. They are like thunderbolts. Destroy them who are on the enemy side and not favourable to Rakshasas.
6::65::24::And then the brilliant Ravana got up from his seat, garlanded Kumbhakarna with garland s of flowers encrusted with gems.
6::65::25::Then Ravana placed armlets, rings, exquisite ornaments, garland s of pearls like moonlight on Kumbhakarna's neck.
6::65::26::Ravana then placed his crown, wonderful fragrant garlands and rich suspended earrings on Kumbhakarna.
6::65::27::Adorned with armlets studded with gems and golden ornaments on his distinguished large ears, Kumbhakarna shone like fire.
6::65::28::Adorned with a huge dark girdle, Kumbhakarna seemed like a bright jewel like Mount Mandara used for churning nectar of immortality fastened by Vasuki.
6::65::29::Kumbhakarna decked in heavy golden shield (impenetrable by any weapon) and difficult to break, seemed like the lightning with self effulgence, glowing like fire, shone like the evening twilight around the mountain peak.
6::65::30::Decked with ornaments on all his limbs, with pike in hand, the Rakshasa was like Narayana ready to take three strides to cover the universe. Endowed with great strength, embraced his brother, went round in reverence bowing down his head and sallied forth.
6::65::31::Kumbhakarna, of huge body, of loud voice and highly capable having been dismissed by Ravana, went with the great army after benediction and started observing.
6::65::32::Many great warriors seated on the best of chariots, with best of weapons amidst noise of conchs and drums, elephants, horses also and thunder like chariot warriors, started to proceed.
6::65::33::On dreadful and mighty serpents, camels, donkeys, horses, lions, antelopes, and birds also the Rakshasas accompanied Kumbhakarna.
6::65::34::Kumbhakarna, the enemy of Devas and Danavas determined and eager showered with a rain of flowers, head covered with parasol, excited with drink, wielding sharpened tridents in hand and smeared with blood red fragrant sandal paste, sallied forth in that state.
6::65::35::Rakshasas of loud voice, great prowess, and fearful with frightening eyes, lifted the many weapons in hand and followed on foot.
6::65::36::Rakshasas with blood red eyes, of huge body size, dark blue in colour, holding tridents, sharpened whetted axes and weapons of many kinds, iron bars and maces, clubs, mallets and palmyra trees, the evil minded vast army set out.
6::65::37::Assuming another fearful form, Kumbhakarna who was highly energetic, endowed with mighty strength and frightful in form, which was a hundred bows in breadth and six hundred bows in height, with eyes like wheels of chariot, enraged, seemed like a huge mountain.
6::65::38::Thus spoke, Kumbhakarna who resembled a charred mountain, with wide mouth, reaching near the Rakshasas, laughing.
6::65::39::Thereafter, furious Kumbhakarna said Now I will consume all the battalions of Vanaras just as moths are consumed by fire.
6::65::40::These forest rangers have never desired to do any harm to me. This clan serve as ornaments of our gardens.
6::65::41::The root cause of besieging Lanka is Rama and Lakshmana. I will kill them in combat.
6::65::42::When Kumbhakarna had spoken that way the Rakshasas made noise that was like the sound of an agitated ocean.
6::65::43::As wise Kumbhakarna was proceeding swiftly , dreadful portents appeared.
6::65::44::The clouds appeared in the colour of donkey and there was thunder and lightning. The oceans, forests and earth seemed as though shaken.
6::65::45::She jackals were seen with flaming morsels throwing from their mouths. Birds wheeled in a circular way and settled.
6::65::46::On the way as he was going an eagle alighted on his pike. His eyes twitched and left shoulder throbbed.
6::65::47::Then a burning meteor fell from the sky making a terrible sound. The sun lost his glow and the wind lost its delight।।
6::65::48::Kumbhakarna went unmindful of the portents which made hair stand on end propelled by the force of destiny.
6::65::49::He who resembled a mountain in form, leapt the boundary wall on foot like a cloud and witnessed the amazing Vanara troops.
6::65::50::On seeing the mountain like form of the foremost of the Rakshasas. the vanaras dispersed in all directions like clouds swept by the wind.
6::65::51::Heavy cloud like Kumbhakarna, a notorious one, perceiving the Vanara troops scattered like clouds in all directions emitted roar, laughing aloud.
6::65::52::Hearing the dreadful roar of Kumbhakarna, that resembled the rumbling of clouds, many Vanaras fell on the ground like severed Sala trees.
6::65::53::Armed with a huge iron bar, Kumbhakarna stood for destroying the enemies like the great time spirit, deadly God of Death waits at the end of the universe along with Kinkaras, like a king.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेपञ्चाषष्टितमस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the sixty fifth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic, the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
