6::16::1::While Vibheeshana advised in Ravana's favour with all good intention, Ravana who was under the influence of death spoke harsh words.
6::16::2::One can live with a known enemy or even with an angry and venomous serpent but cannot stay together with one who professes to be a friend and devoted to an enemy.
6::16::3::The behaviour of close relatives in all worlds is known to me. They are happy at the difficulties of relatives.
6::16::4::O Rakshasa Relatives will insult and disapprove their chief even if he is an accomplished one, a virtuous one or a heroic one and does his duty (as a ruler).
6::16::5::Pretending to be friendly forever the relatives rejoice in them is fortunes of their relatives. They create terrible fear like desperadoes and covertly ones.
6::16::6::In the past elephants in the lotus park, uttered some verses on seeing men holding snares in hand. I will relate those that I heard. You may listen.
6::16::7::We have no fear of fire or weapons or noose of death. Selfish relatives are causing fear in us.
6::16::8::It is known that they (paternal relatives) teach the means to catch us. Out of all fears the fear of close relatives is the great difficulty for us.
6::16::9::In the cows' wealth is present, in the brahmins forbearance is seen, in the women capriciousness exists but in close relatives fear is present.
6::16::10::Gentle (Vibheeshana) one Since you belong to the same kinsfolk (as I) you do not like me, who is born of noble descent, attained the position of chief (of clan), is worshipped by the world, and attained sovereignty.
6::16::11::Just as drops of water that fall on lotus leaves do not adhere to each other, like wise however long you spend with an unworthy (relative) one, good friendship does not take place.
6::16::12::Just as honeybees do not have gratitude after drinking (honey) and satisfying, the friendship with an unworthy person like you is of no use.
6::16::13::Just as an elephant takes dust with its trunk and abuses (and spreads on) its own body after taking a bath so also is the association with unworthy ones.
6::16::14::Just as the autumn rain poured out from the thundering clouds does not dampen, in the same way unworthy ones do not have affection.
6::16::15::Just as honeybees do not stay at the flower after satisfaction with the nectar, in the same way is the friendship with unworthy ones.
6::16::16::O Night ranger (Vibheeshana) If any other one had spoken such words, I would not let him live this moment and also destroy. Fie upon you.
6::16::17::Vibheeshana who was just in his argument rose up, wielding mace in hand accompanied by the four Rakshasas, when Ravana had spoken such harsh words to him.
6::16::18::Great Vibheeshana was enraged. Then going up into the sky spoke these words to his brother, the Lord of Rakshasas.
6::16::19::O King You, being my elder brother, you may tell me What you wish. You are equal to father being elder brother and are to be honoured. But you have not followed the righteous path. The words you spoke are not pardonable.
6::16::20::O Tenheaded king Fallen under the sway of death, you are foolish. You do not understand the well prepared good words spoken by me wishing your welfare.
6::16::21::O King Those who speak pleasingly are always easier to find than those who speak unpleasant but good words. Listeners of unpleasant words (though good) are difficult (to find).
6::16::22::Bound by the noose of death which is the cause of destruction of all beings you are going to be killed just as the burning house if you ignore my advice.
6::16::23::While the sharp golden arrows of Rama burning like fire strike you, I do not wish to see.
6::16::24::Even the heroic archers and mighty men wielding weapons will fall in war seized by death like the dams of sands.
6::16::25::Since you are an elderly one, I desired to tender good advice and spoke these words. I may be excused. You protect all these Rakshasas, this capital city and yourself after I depart. Let you be auspicious and be happy.
6::16::26::O King My words (of advice), given in your interest to prevent you, are not palatable to you. Good advice tendered by friends at the time of death will not be received by those beings whose life is over.।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषोडशस्सर्गः।।This is the end of the sixteenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
