6::41::1::Rama, brother of Lakshmana, seeing the signs of war, embraced Sugriva and spoke these words.
6::41::2::You have done this courageous feat without consulting me. Rulers do not do such actions.
6::41::3::O hero, who is fond of daring actions! To me, to the army and Vibheeshana you created a great doubt by this bold action of yours.
6::41::4::O broad shouldered hero, tamer of foes! Do not do this kind of action. Even if you were harmed a bit, O destroyer of foes, of what use is it to me or even to Sita, Bharata, Satrughna or to Lakshmana or even to my body?
6::41::5::Mighty Sugriva! You resemble Indra and Varuna in might. Your valour is known to me. I have decided in my mind to kill the sons of Ravana and his relatives in battle, coronate Vibheeshana in Lanka, and hand over the kingdom to Bharata and give up my body.
6::41::6::To Rama who was speaking in that manner, Sugriva replied, Heroic Rama! Seeing that Ravana, who has borne away your consort, and knowing my own strength, how can I tolerate?
6::41::7::Raghava heard the hero Sugriva, applauding him and spoke these words to Lakshmana, who was endowed with prosperity.
6::41::8::Lakshmana! We should occupy a region with cool water and good fruits and plan to divide the army and be ready.
6::41::9::I foresee the terrific destruction of eminent heroes among Bears, monkeys and Rakshasas. I see the danger approaching.
6::41::10::The winds are blowing severely, the earth is quaking in, the mountain peaks are shaking, and the elephants bearing the earth (in the four corners) are falling.
6::41::11::The fierce clouds resembling wild birds are making terrible harsh sounds and rain mixed with drops of blood is showering.
6::41::12::The twilight appears like red sander trees, the burning fire falling from the sun is like a mass of fire and frightening.
6::41::13::The desperate inauspicious sounds of ominous beasts crying pitifully facing the sun are causing great fear.
6::41::14::Like at the time of universal dissolution, the moon is not radiant, being surrounded by black and red halo at night and is tormenting.
6::41::15::Lakshmana! Short dark spot observed in the Sun 's orbit is inauspicious. moon is surrounded by copper colour and dreary.
6::41::16::Just as the spots on the moon, the stars are also dirty and not visible. It forebodes the end of the universe Lakshmana!
6::41::17::The crows, hawks and also vultures are joining lowly animals like jackals and making loud noises which is inauspicious and not good.
6::41::18::
6::41::19::The land will remain covered by rocks, tridents, swords hurled by the Vanaras and Rakshasas and with flesh and blood.
6::41::20::Mighty hero Rama, (the elder brother of Lakshmana) said to Lakshmana in this manner (as described earlier) and descended from the peak of the mountain without delay.
6::41::21::Climbing down the mountain, the righteous Rama reviewed in his mind the strength of his army and the enemy which is difficult to assail.
6::41::22::Raghava, who is knowledgeable of when to do what, motivated the army of Vanaras and Sugriva and ordered.
6::41::23::Surrounded by a large army in front, the broad shouldered Rama proceeded towards Lanka.
6::41::24::Then Vibheeshana, Sugriva, Hanuman, Jambavan, Nala, Neela in the same way Lakshmana followed.
6::41::25::Then the bears, monkeys, covering all over the land went behind Rama.
6::41::26::The monkeys who were of the size of elephants capable of warding off the enemy, bore huge grown up trees in their hands and went.
6::41::27::In a short while the two brothers Rama and Lakshmana, tamers of foes reached the city of Lanka.
6::41::28::Commanded by Rama's words the Vanaras remaining in their positions as ordained, entered the wonderful Lanka, which was decorated with flags, embellished with gardens. The defensive walls and arches of the boundary of Lanka were difficult to access even for Devatas.
6::41::29::Accompanied by his brother Lakshmana, Rama, armed with bow, blocked the northern gate of Lanka which was like a lofty mountain peak and protected.
6::41::30::(Dasaratha's son) Rama who had Lakshmana as follower reached the northern gate protected by Ravana. Just as the ocean is guarded by Varuna, it was guarded by terrific Rakshasas, who were secretly hiding all over like the Rakshasas in the subterranean region with small amounts of numerous armours for protection. It was not possible for anyone other than Rama to enter.
6::41::31::Rama Saw there, numerous weapons of every kind so also shields for the combatants of war.
6::41::32::Neela the commanderinchief of the army of monkeys, a valiant one, also Dwivida, and Mainda reached the east gate and remained there.
6::41::33::Angada endowed with great prowess along with Rshaba, Gavaksha, Gaja, and Gavaya reached the south gate.
6::41::34::Mighty monkey Hanuman united with heroes Pramati and Praghasa and others protected the west gate.
6::41::35::Sugriva chief of all army and best of the monkey army who was equal to Garuda of beautiful wings, endowed with wind speed remained in the middle (of north and west) post.
6::41::36::Renowned generals of the Vanara army and thirtysix crores of Vanaras stood there camping.
6::41::37::By the command of Rama, Vibheeshana accompanied by Lakshmana posted crores and crores of Vanaras there.
6::41::38::Sushena along with Jambavan and a large army of Vanaras were posted in the centre not far from Rama at the west by Rama's order.
6::41::39::Vanaras who resembled tigers, endowed with sharp teeth joyfully stood there holding trees and peaks of mountain waiting to combat.
6::41::40::All had their tails lifted unusually, had their nails and teeth sharp as weapons, some had unnatural face, and all of them had distorted eyes (as in fury).
6::41::41::A few of them were having the strength of ten elephants, some had ten times more than others, and a few were endowed with great strength equal to thousand elephants.
6::41::42::Few monkeys had strength of an ogha, some had a hundred times more, and the monkey commanders possessed immeasurable strength.
6::41::43::There it seemed as if a flight of locusts had gathered, with monkey army gathered there. It was amazing and astonishing.
6::41::44::Vanaras settled in such a way all around Lanka completely covering the land with those already at Lanka.
6::41::45::A hundred thousand bars and monkeys and several others already gathered at the gates of Lanka to fight proceeded.
6::41::46::All over the mountain the monkeys surrounded the boundary wall of Lanka city to collect information.
6::41::47::Mighty Vanaras holding uprooted trees occupied everywhere and it seemed difficult for even wind to enter Lanka.
6::41::48::Caught by Vanaras like clouds and equalled Indra in valour gave way to wonder for the Rakshasas.
6::41::49::Thereafter with the divisions of the Vanara army moving like the ocean on the mountain peak, appeared like the roaring sound of water in the ocean moving out of boundary.
6::41::50::By the great sound the boundary, the archways and the mountains and forests shook violently.
6::41::51::Protected by Rama and Lakshmana and Sugriva that an army of monkeys became difficult to assail even for Rakshasas and Devatas.
6::41::52::Deliberating on the action to be taken to kill the Rakshasas, Raghava himself called the army and gathered them and the ministers all of them again and again discussed and took the decision. Later recalling the king's duty with Vibheeshana, summoned Vali's son Angada and spoke these words.
6::41::53::O noble Hanuman crossing over Lanka without fear, giving up the difficulties experienced earlier we reached. Admonish the tenheaded king who has lost senses, his past fortune and sovereignty.
6::41::54::O night ranger! the time has come for punishment for the sins committed by you to the sages, Devatas, so also to Gandharvas, celestial beauties, Nagas, Yakshas and the kings because of your delusion in conceit. Surely your pride about the boons begotten from the selfborn creator will be gone, said Rama.
6::41::55::You, who have abducted my wife, I will punish you with a rod of punishment. I am your chastiser, O king of Lanka I have taken position.
6::41::56::O Rakshasa! Even Devatas, sages and even royal sages have also lost their lives, killed by me.
6::41::57::O lowly Rakshasa! By deceiving me you took away Sita. Display that strength now.
6::41::58::If you do not seek my protection I will devoid this world of Rakshasas with my sharp arrows.
6::41::59::This Vibheeshana, the best of Rakshasas will be glorious and fortunate undoubtedly having got the kingdom of Lanka.
6::41::60::One who is not aware of himself, an unrighteous sinner ruling with foolish mates cannot enjoy the kingdom even for a moment.
6::41::61::O Rakshasa! You are resorting to fortitude and valour and embracing gallantry in war. By my arrows you will obtain peace (in death).
6::41::62::O Ravana! You have no control over your mind, and if you come in the range of my eyesight and enter the three worlds also you will not go alive again.
6::41::63::Having addressed it in well meaning words, Rama said 'I will do you obsequies as no one will be left in Lanka to do your last rites'.
6::41::64::Rama having spoken that way, Tara's son, Angada, who was like fire god, who was unwearied in action flew to the sky.
6::41::65::Angada landed on Ravana's palace in a moment and saw the tiger like prosperous Ravana seated with his ministers.
6::41::66::Thereafter, the leader of the monkeys, Angada adorned with golden armlets stood like a blazing fire at a distance.
6::41::67::I made known the words of Rama completely without adding or deleting. You may listen.
6::41::68::I am the son of Vali,by name Angada,an envoy of Rama ,the king of Kosala of unwearied action. You may know that I have landed
6::41::69::Raghava, the enhancer of the happiness of Kausalya speaks to you. Ruthless Rakshasa! Sallying forth, get ready for combat.
6::41::70::You and your son's relatives and followers being killed (by me) the three worlds will be rid of fear of you.
6::41::71::You are an enemy of the gods, Danavas and Yakshas, Gandharvas and Nagas and being a thorn in the neck of sages, I will uproot you from here.
6::41::72::Unless you return back Vaidehi respectfully, bowing down to me you will be killed and Vibheeshana will get the fortune.
6::41::73::The leader of the monkeys having spoken in that manner, Ravana the ruler of night rangers was overtaken by fury.
6::41::74::Thereafter, Ravana who was shaken by fury repeatedly commanded his ministers and said 'Let this evil minded monkey be seized and killed'.
6::41::75::Thereafter, having heard the words of Ravana, the four Rakshasas seized Angada blazing in brilliance like fire.
6::41::76::Then Angada, the son of Tara, on his own wanting to exhibit his strength in the presence of the Rakshasa army allowed himself to be caught.
6::41::77::Then Angada holding the Rakshasas by his arms came down like birds on the roof of the palace which stood like a mountain.
6::41::78::Crushed by that speed of Angada coming down as if from the sky all the Rakshasas fell down on the ground while the Rakshasa king looked on.
6::41::79::Then as the courageous Vali's son landed on the high peak of the palace which resembled a mountain peak, Ravana stood looking.
6::41::80::As Ravana was looking, Angada trampling his feet gave way to the palace just as Himalayan peak broke to hit Indra.
6::41::81::Hitting on the peak of the palace, Angada declaring his own name emitting loud sound rose up to the sky.
6::41::82::Angada caused pain to the Rakshasas and delighted the monkeys and returned to the midst of Vanaras near Rama.
6::41::83::Ravana exhibiting extreme anger at the shattering of his palace and seeing his destruction started sighing heavily.
6::41::84::Delighted by the roaring sound of many monkeys Rama awaited surrounded by groups of monkeys desirous of starting war.
6::41::85::Sushena of great prowess, who resembled a mountain in form stood there surrounded by many Vanaras who could change their form at their will.
6::41::86::Sushena, a monkey who is difficult to encounter, went around all the four gates just like the moon goes around stars by the order of Sugriva.
6::41::87::Seeing the large army of a hundred Akshauhinis of monkeys staying near Lanka spreading beyond the sea waiting for war the Rakshasas were wonder struck, some feared, some were alarmed to witness the jubilant Vanaras who exhibited joy alone.
6::41::88::The Rakshasas were desperate to see the spread of monkeys over the entire area from the boundary to moat of Lanka. The way the space between was filled with Vanaras seemed as though the Vanaras converted into boundaries. Rakshasas were seen making a loud noise.
6::41::89::To protect the kingdom of Rakshasas, the Rakshasas holding weapons making frightening sounds and shouting, advanced for a great War. It seemed as though it was the end of the universe.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the forty first sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
