6::22::1::अथ and thereafter, रघुश्रेष्ट the best one among Raghu's, सागरम् to ocean, दारुणम् terrific, वचः words, उवाच uttered, महार्णव ocean, अद्य now, सपाताळम् that under world, त्वाम् you, शोषयिष्यामि will make it dry.
6::22::2::सागर O ocean, मया by me, शरनिर्दग्दतोयस्य water dried up by the arrows, परिशुष्कस्य when it is dried up, शोषितसत्त्वस्य dried up to the core, महान् huge, सांसुः sand, उत्पद्यते will appear.
6::22::3::सागर O Ocean, मत्कार्मुकविसृष्टेन all the creatures inhabiting you, शरवर्षेण by the rain of arrows, प्लवङ्गमाः monkeys, पदभिरेव to the other side of the shore, परंअद्य now to the other, गमिष्यन्ति will go.
6::22::4::दानवालय abode of demons, विचिन्वन् abode, पौरुषम् valour, नाभिजानासि, not known, विक्रममपि even prowess, न not, मत्तः mine, सन्तापम् sorrow, गमिष्यसिनाम will face from me.
6::22::5::महाबलः strong, ब्रह्मदण्डनिभम् resembling the rod of punishment of the creator, Brahma, शरम् arrow, ब्राह्मेणअस्त्रेण energized by Brahma, संयोज्य stretched, श्रेष्ठे best one, धनुषि by the bow, संयोज्य stretched, विचकर्ष released.
6::22::6::तस्मिन् by that, शरासने arrows from the bow, राघवेण by Rama, विकृष्टे pulled out, सहसा at once, रोदसी from the sky, सम्पफालेन to the earth, पर्वताश्च even mountains, चकम्पिरे trembled.
6::22::7::तदा then, तमश्च by darkness, लोकम् world, अव्रते engulfed, दिशश्च even the directions, नचकाशिरे not noticeable, चाशसरांसिसरितः Furthermore rivers, प्रतिचुक्षुभिरे got agitated.
6::22::8::चन्द्रभास्करौ the Sun and moon, नक्षत्रेःसह with stars, तिर्यक् obliquely, सङ्गतौ moved, भास्करांशुभिः even the Sun light, आदीप्तम् not shining, तमसाच on account of darkness, समावृतम् engulfed all over, तत् then, आकाशम् sky, उल्काशत by the meteors, विदीपितम् again lighted, प्रचकाशे shone, अन्तरिक्षात् from the sky, अतुलस्वनाः unparalleled, निर्घाताः thunder, निर्जग्मुः shot forth.
6::22::9::दिव्यमारुतपङ् ख्कयः terrific wind blew, वपुस्फुरुश्चघनादिव्यादि breaking forth the clouds, तदा then, जलदान् abode of cold water, उद्वहन् taking away in upward direction, अपिः even, वृक्षान् trees, बभञ्जच broke into.
6::22::10::शैलाग्रान् mountain peaks, अरुजन् च sounding, शिखराणि tops, बभञ्जच breaking, महामेधा huge cloud, दिवि sky, संगताः collecting together, महास्वनाः having extraordinary speed, वैद्युतान् fire of lightning, अनगीन् from the sky, मुमुचुः clouds, तदा then, ते those, महाशनयः loud sound.
6::22::11::दृश्यानि that which could be seen, यानि those, भूतानि creatures, आशनेसमम् remained still, चुकुश्रुः suffering pain, अदृश्यानि that which are seen, भूतानिच beings also, भैरवस्वन् like the devils and ghosts, मुमुचुः clouds, अभिभूतानि few other creatures, सन्त्रस्तानि from their place, उद्विजन्तिच came to appear, शिशियरेच even though cold, सम्प्रविव्यथिरेचापि although were together, भयात् in fear, नचपस्पन्दिरे were even thrown off.
6::22::12::ततः thereafter, सतोयोर्मिः those waves of water, सहाभूतै with its creatures, सनागः with serpents, सहराक्षसः with the demons, महोदधि great ocean, सहसा at once, भीमवेगः at terrific speed, अभूत् unprecedented, वेगात् speed, सम्ल्पवात् thrown out, अन्यत्रवेलाम् by the other tides, योजनम् one yojana, व्यतिचक्राम was thrown.
6::22::13::राघवः Rama, अमित्रघ्नः destroyer of foes, रामः Rama, तदा then, समतिक्रान्तम् transgressing, समुद्धतम् overweening, तम् them, नदनदीपतिम् Lord of rivers, नातिचक्राम not go far.
6::22::14::ततः then, महामेरोः over the mighty Meru, उदयं rising, दिवाकरःइव like the Sun, सागरः Lord of ocean, समुद्रस्य ocean's, मध्यात् middle, स्वयम् himself, उत्थितः risen.
6::22::15::स्निग्धवैदूर्यसङ्काशः bright like Vaidurya stone, जम्बूनदविभूषणः decked in pure gold, समुद्रः Lord of the ocean, दीप्तास्यैः as though blazing, पन्नगैरक्तमाल्यास्सह with serpents, प्रदृश्यत appeared.
6::22::16::रत्क्तमाल्याम्बरधरः clad in red coloured robes, पद्मपत्रनिभेक्षणः whose eyes were like lotus petals, शिरसा on the head, सर्वपुष्पमयीम् wearing different kinds of flowers, दिव्याम् wonderful, प्रजम् wreath, धारयन् wearing, जातरूपमयैश्चैव of polished gold, तपनीयविभूषणैः decked in shining ornaments, आत्मजानाम् from his own territory, रत्नानाम् precious gems, भूषणोत्तमैः best of ornaments, भूषितः decked, मण्डितः with different kinds of minerals, हिमनान् शैलःइव resembled the Himalaya mountain, एकावलीमध्यगतम् in the midst of pearl necklace on his bosom, पाण्डरप्रभम् shedding white lustre, कौस्तुभस्यसहोदरम् resembling Kausthuba (a precious jewel with emerald gem worn by Lord Vishnu), तरलम् hanging necklace, विपुलेन broad, उपसा near, बिभ्रत् moving, अघूर्णिततरङ्गौघः with several tides rising up, कालिकानिलसङ्कुलः with multitude of tides touching the of clouds, देवतानाम् goddesses, सरूपाभि forms also, नानारूपाभिः of diverse forms, गङ्गासिन्दुप्रधानाभिः Ganga and Sindhu, such important rivers, आपगाभिः coming near, समावृतः surrounded by, ईश्वरः Lord, वीर्यवान् valiant one, सागरः Sagara, समुपक्रम्य all coming near, पूर्वम् first, आम्नत्यर greeting, प्राञ्जलिः with folded hand s, शरपाणिनम् one who held the arrow, राघवम् to Rama, वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवीत् spoke.
6::22::17::सौम्य noble, राघव Rama, पृथिवी earth, वायुः wind, आकाशम् space, आपः water, ज्योतिश्च fire, शाश्वतम् permanent, मार्गम् path, आश्रिताः following, स्वभावे its nature, तिष्ठन्ति remain.
6::22::18::तत् that, अहम् I, अगाधः fathomless, अप्लवःइतयत् as such not capable of swimming out, एषः so, ममापि mine too, स्वभावः nature, गाधःतु fording, विकारः deviation, भवेत् will be, एतत् as such, ते to you, प्रवदामि I proclaim
6::22::19::पार्थिवात्मज O Lord of the land, ग्राहनकाकुलजलम् infested by poisonous animals, कामात् out of desire, कथंचन in any case, स्तम्बयेयम् solidify water, लोभाद्वा out of covetousness, भयात् out of fear, न not.
6::22::20::राम O Rama, अहम् I, येनापि by means of which, तथा so also, विधास्ये in such a mode, हरीणाम् by the Vanaras, तरणे to cross over, स्थलम् base, यत्रा passage, करिष्यामि I will do, तथा and similarly, विषहिष्ये the poisonous creatures, सेना army, यावत् total, तरष्यति crosses over, ग्राहाः seizing, नप्रहरिष्यन्ति will not be of aggressive nature.
6::22::21::तदा then, रामः Rama, तम् , अब्रवीत् said, वरुणालया abode of Varuna, मे my, शृणु listen, अमोघः unfailing, आयम् this, महाबाणः mighty arrow, कस्मिन् in which, देशे location, निपात्यताम् should it be allowed to descend down.
6::22::22::महातेजाः brilliant one, महोदधिः great ocean, रामस्य Rama's, वचनम् words, श्रुत्वा on hearing, तम् his, महाशरम् mighty arrow, दृष्टवाच seeing at, राघवम् Rama, वाक्यम् this words, अब्रवीत् spoke.
6::22::23::भवान् you, यथा like, लोके region, ख्यातः famous, द्रुमकुल्यःइति called Drumakulya, पुण्यतरः a holy place, कश्चित् a little, अवकाशः there is scope for you, मम to my, उत्तरेण north, अस्ति will be.
6::22::24::तत्र there, उग्रदर्शनकर्माणः marauders of terrific action, पापाः sinful, आभीरप्रमुखाः chief of Abhiras, बहवः many, दस्यवः enemies of gods, मम my, सलिलम् waters, पिबन्ति drinking.
6::22::25::राम Rama, पापकर्मभिः sinful actions also, तैः those, पापैः sinners, तत् that, स्पर्शनम् their touch, नसहेयम् I do not tolerate, शरोत्तमः mighty arrow, तत्र there तेषु by that अमोघः unfailing, क्रियताम् can be released on them.
6::22::26::महात्मनः great self, तस्यसागरस्य that Sagara's, तत् those, वचनम् words of request, श्रुत्वा hearing, सागरदर्शनात् on account of seeing the Sagara, दीप्तम् glowing, परम् supreme, तंशरम् that arrow, मुमोच let off.
6::22::27::तेन by the, वज्राशनिसमप्रभः like that of Indra's glow, शरः dart, यत्र there, निपातितः let down, तत् that, पृथिव्याम् region of land, मरुकान्तारम् Marakantaram, विश्रुतंखलु indeed was known as popularly.
6::22::28::तदा then, तत्र there, शल्यपीडिता crevice by the dart, वसुधा earth, ननाद popularly known, तस्मात् therefore, बाणमुखात् by the piercing of the dart, रसातलात् from the underworld, तोयम् water, उत्पपात came out.
6::22::29::तदा then, सः that, कूपः well, व्रणःइत्येन as Vrana, विश्रुतः popularly, बभूव came to be known, समुद्रस्येव like the water of the ocean, तईयम् water, सततम् always, उत्थितम् springs out, दृश्यते seen.
6::22::30::तस्मात् from that, दारुणः terrific, अवधारणशब्दः the sound that was produced, समपद्यत crack caused, तद्बाणनिपातेन by the act of letting off the dart, कुक्षिषु in the cavities, त्वपः water, अशोषयत् dried up.
6::22::31::मरुकान्तारम् Marukantaram, त्रिषु in three, लोकेषु worlds, विख्यातम् very famous, दशरथात्मजः Dasaratha's son, विद्वान् learned, अमरविक्रमः one who has the valour of gods, रामः Rama, तम् those, कुक्षिम् cavities, शोषयित्वा making dry, तस्मैमरवे for that Marukantaram, वरवे boon, ददौ: gave.
6::22::32::मरुः Maru, रामस्य Rama's, वरदानात् by virtue of the boon, पशव्यश्च tender grass for cows, अल्परोगश्च with less diseases, फलमूलरसायुतः with fruits and roots and honey, बहुस्नेहः very ideal, बहुक्षीरः plenty of milk, सुगधनिः fragrant, विविधौषधिः diverse kinds of medicinal herbs, एवम् in that way, युक्तः suitable, एतैः all these, गुणैः qualities, संयुतः endowed with, शिवः auspicious, पन्थाः holy, बभूव became.
6::22::33::तदा then, तस्मिन् that, कुक्षौ land, दग्धे burnt, सरितांपति Lord of rivers,, समुद्रः ocean, सर्वशास्त्रज्ञम् learned in all sastras, राघवम् Rama, इदम् these, वचनम् words, अब्रवीत् spoken.
6::22::34::सौम्य noble one, श्रीमान् prosperous one, नलोनाम named Nala, अयम् this, विश्वकर्मणः by Vishwakarma's, तनयः son, पित्रा father, दत्तवरः obtained boons, विश्वकर्मणः in architecture, प्रतिमः equal to father.
6::22::35::महोत्साहः full of zeal, एषःवानरः this Vanara, मयि over me, सेतुम् bridge, करोतु will built, तम् him, अहम् I, धारयिष्यामि will bear, पिता father, यथा that way, एषः he is, तथा like him.
6::22::36::उदधिः Sea God, एवम् in that way, उक्त्वा having spoken, नष्टः disappeared, तदा thereafter, वानरश्रेष्ठः foremost of Vanaras, नलः Nala, समुत्थाय getting up, महाबलः mighty, रामम् at Rama, वाक्यम् these words, अब्रवीत् spoke.
6::22::37::अहम् I, पितुः father, सामर्थ्यम् skill, आस्थाय adopting, विस्तीर्णे broad, वरुणालये on the abode of Varuna, सेतुम् bridge, करिष्यामि will build महोदधिः ocean god, तत्त्वम् truth, आह has spoken.
6::22::38::भीमः fearsome, अयंहि I also, सागरः ocean, महोदधिः mighty ocean, दण्डभयात् fear of punishment, सेतुकर्मदिदृक्ष्या to witness the building of a bridge, राघवाय to Rama, गाधम् place, ददौ allowed a passage.
6::22::39::मन्दरे on Mandara mountain, विश्वकर्मणा Vishwakarmana, मममातुः my mother, वरः boon, दत्तः has given, अहम् I, तस्य her, औरसःपुत्रः born out of her body, विश्वकर्मणा Vishwakarma, सदृशः I am like him, एतेन by that, स्मारितःअस्मि I have put in my memory, महोदधिः great ocean, तत्त्वम् nature, आह I am aware, अनुक्तः I have not spoken, अहम् I, आत्मनः myself, गुणान् qualities, वः unless, नप्रब्रूयाम् will not speak, अहम् I, वरुणालये abode of Varuna, सेतुम् bridge, कर्तुम् will build, समर्थश्चापि am capable, कामम् required material, वानरपुङ्गवाः Vanara leaders, अद्यैव right away, सेतुम् for the bridge, बद्नन्तु for building.
6::22::40::ततः then, रामेण by Rama, विसृष्टाः directed, रियूथपाः Vanara troop leaders, हृष्टाः gladly, शतसहस्रशः hundred thousand, महारण्यम् huge forest, सर्वतः all over, अभ्युत्पेतुः sprang up.
6::22::41::नगसङ्काशाः mountain like, ते those, शाखामृगगणर्षभाः bulls among Vanaras, तत there upon, नगान् from the mountain, पादपान् roots of trees, बभञ्जुः collected, सागरम् into the sea, प्रचकर्षुश्च started moving.
6::22::42::वानराः Vanaras, सालैश्च sala trees, अश्वकर्णैश्च as vakarna trees, धवैः dhava trees, वंशैश्च bamboo, कुटजैः kutaja, अर्जुनैः arjuna, तालैः palmira, तिलकैः tilaka, न्तिशैरपि trisaira, बिल्वकैः bilva, सप्तपर्णैश्च and saptaparni, पुष्पितैःकर्णिकारैः karnikara blossoms, चूतैश्च mango, अशोकवृक्षैश्च and ashoka trees, सागरम् into ocean, पर्यपूरयन् brought and dumped.
6::22::43::हरिसत्तमाः foremost of the Vanaras, समूलान् च along with the roots, विमूलान् च some without roots, पादपान् trees, इन्द्रकेतूनिव like Indra's flagstaff, उद्यम्य lifting up, प्रजह्रुः hurled वानरास्तरून् Vanaras thrown down (into the sea)
6::22::44::ताळान् palmira, दाडिमगुल्मांश्च dadima trees, नारिकेळविभीतकान् coconut trees, करीरान् karira, बकुलान् bakula, निम्बान् nimba, समन्ततः brought all of them, समाजह्रुः and dropped into the ocean.
6::22::45::महाकायाः of huge body, महाबालाः strong, हस्तिमात्रान् like elephants, पाषाणान् stones, पर्वतांश्च mountains, समुत्पाट्य collecting and lifting up, यन्स्रैः by machines, परिवहन्तिच transported.
6::22::46::सहसा at once, प्रक्षिप्यमाणैः thrown up, अचलैः mountains, उद्दृतम् rose up, जलम् water, आकाशम् sky, समुत्ससर्प touched, ततः then, पुनः again, अवासर्पत् spread
6::22::47::समन्ततः all over, निपतन्तः on account of throwing, समुद्रम् into the sea, क्षोभयामासुः stirred up, अन्ये others, शतयोजनम् a hundred yojanas, आयतम् breadth, सूत्राणि by rope, प्रगृह्णन्ति held.
6::22::48::नलः Nala, नदनदीपतेः Lord of rivers, मध्ये centre, महासेतुम् huge bridge, चक्रे started, तदा then, घोरकर्मभिः terrific task, वानरैः with Vanaras, सेतुः bridge, क्रियते built.
6::22::49::अन्ये others, दण्डान् sticks, प्रगृह्णन्ति holding, तथा in the same way, अपरे some others, विचिन्वन्ति following, रामस्य of Rama, आज्ञापुरस्सरैः the command in front, शतशः in hundreds, मेघाभिः like clouds, पर्वताग्रैश्च like top of mountains, वानरैः with Vanaras, तृणैः reeds, काष्ठैश्च logs of wood, बबन्धिरे built.
6::22::50::वानराः Vanaras, पुष्पिताग्रैः trees with blossoms on top, तरुभिः creepers, सेतुम् for the bridge, बध्नन्ति binding दानवसन्निभा like the Danavas, गिरिप्रख्यान् like the huge mountains, पाषाणांश्च boulders also, गिरीणाम् mountains, शिखराणिच tops, गृह्य seizing, परिधावन्त running, दृश्यन्ते were found.
6::22::51::तस्मिन् in that, महोदधौ lofty ocean, क्षिप्यमाणानां hurling, शिलानाम् mountains, तत्र so also, निपात्यताम् by throwing, शैलानाम् mountains, तुमुलः tumultuous, शब्दः sound, तदा then, बभूव arose.
6::22::52::प्रहृष्टैः rejoicing, गजसङ्काशैः elephant like, त्वरमाणैः speedily, प्लवङ्गमैः the monkeys, प्रथमेन first, अह्ना one day, चतुर्धश fourteen, योजनानि yojana distance, कृतानि was built.
6::22::53::तथैन in the same order, भीमकायैः of fierce body, महाबलैः extremely strong, प्लवगैः Vanaras, तूर्णम् soon, द्वितीयेन on the second, अह्ना one day, विंशतिः twenty, योजनानि yojanas, कृतानि built.
6::22::54::तथा that way, त्वरमाणैः very fast, महकायैः of huge body, तृतीयेन on the third, अह्ना one day, एकविंशतिरेवच twenty one, योजनानि yojanas, कृतानिच constructed.
6::22::55::ततः there upon, महावेगैः of great speed, त्वरितैः at once, अथापि so also, वा and, चतुर्धेन on the fourth, अह्ना a day, द्वाविंशतिः twenty two, योजनानि yojanas, कृतानि did.
6::22::56::तथा similarly, पञ्चमेन fifth day, अह्ना a day, क्षिप्रकारिभिः those who were endowed with great impetus, प्लवगैः Vanaras, सुवेलम् अधिकृत्य crossing mount Suvela, त्रयोविंशत् twentythree, योजनानि yojanas.
6::22::57::वानरवरः foremost of the Vanaras, श्रीमान् glorious, विश्वकर्मात्मजः son of Vishwakarma, बलि strong one, सः he, अस्य his, पिता father, यथा like, तथा so also, सागरे in the sea, सेतुम् bridge, बबन्ध built.
6::22::58::मकरालये abode crocodiles, सागरे in the sea, नलेन by Nala, कृतः built, सुभगः auspicious, श्रीमान् glorious, सः that, सेतुः bridge, अम्बरे sky, स्वातीपथइव like the street of stars, शुशुभे looked.
6::22::59::ततः then, सगन्धर्वा the Gandharvas, देवाः gods, सिद्दाश्च even siddhas, परमर्षयः very happy, तत् then, अद्भुतम् it is wonderful, द्रष्टुकामाः desiring to see that, आगम्यगगने reached the sky, तस्थुः stationed.
6::22::60::देवगन्धर्वाः gods and Gandharvas, दशयोजनविस्तीर्णम् ten yojanas in width, शतयोजनम् hundred yojanas, आयतम् in length, सुदुष्करम् exceedingly difficult to build, नलसेतुम् bridge built by Nala, ददृशुः witnessed.
6::22::61::प्लवङ्गमाः monkeys, आप्लवन्तः here and there jumping, प्लवन्तश्च jumping about, गर्जन्तश्च roaring, सर्वभूतानि all creatures, आच्नित्यम् that which cannot be conceived in mind, असह्यंच impossible, अद्भुतम् marvellous, रोमहर्षणम् which is thrilling, सागरे in the sea, तत् that, सेतुबन्दनम् bridge constructed, ददृशुः witnessed.
6::22::62::महौजसाम् the glorious, वानराणाम् Vanaras, तानि those, कोटिसहस्राणि thousands of crores, सागरे sea, सेतुम् bridge, बध्नन्तः constructed, महोदधेः from the great ocean, पारम् other side, जग्मुः reached.
6::22::63::विशालः broad, सुकृतः well built, श्रीमान् magnificent, सुभूमिः extensive, सुसमाहितः smootheven without ups and downs, महान् huge, सेतुः bridge, सागरे in the sea, सीमन्तइवअशोभत was charming like the partition in the woman's hair.
6::22::64::ततः there upon, विभीषणः Vibheeshana, गदापाणिः holder of mace, परेषाम् enemies, अभिघातार्थम् to slay the aforesaid, सचिवैःसहा along with friends, समुद्रस्य from the ocean, पारे other side, अतिष्ठत् stayed.
6::22::65::ततः then, सुग्रीवस्तु Sugriva also, सत्यपराक्रमम् one of truthful valour, रामम् Rama, प्राह mount, वीर heroic, मकरालयः home of crocodiles, अयम् this, आरोह climbing, अथ and so, लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, त्वम् you, हनूमन्तम् Hanuman's, हि will do, अङ्गदम् Angada, एतौ like that, वानरौ Vanaras, वैहायसौ to the sky, युवाम् hold up both, तारयिष्यतः will assist to cross.
6::22::66::सलक्ष्मणः accompanied by Lakshmana, श्रीमान् glorious, धर्मात्मा righteous, रामः Rama, सुग्रीवेण with Sugriva, समन्वितः joining together, धन्वी wielder of bow, तस्यसैन्यस्य his army, अग्रतः in front, जगाम proceeded.
6::22::67::अन्ये others, प्लवङ्गमाः monkeys, मध्येनगच्छन्ति going in the middle, अन्ये some others, पार्श्वतः in the side, अन्ये some others, सलिलम् water, प्रपतन्ति falling down (having no space to walk), अन्ये some others, मार्गम् path, नलेभिरे on the shore, केचित् a few, वैहायसगताः through the path of sky, सुपर्णाःइव like birds, पुप्लुवुः went.
6::22::68::तरन्ती by the advancement, भीमा frightening, हरिवाहिनी army troops of monkeys, महता massive, घोषेण by the loud noise, समुच्छ्रितम् risen, भीमम् terrific, तस्य its सिन्धोः of the ocean, घोषम् sound, अन्तर्धधे drowned.
6::22::69::नलसेतुना the bridge of Nala, तीर्णा having reached, वानराणाम् Vanaras, सा that, वाहिनी, army राज्ञा by the king, बहुमूलफलोदके filled with several roots and fruits, तीरे shore, निविविशे settled.
6::22::70::देवाः gods, सिद्धचारणैः siddhas and charanas, महर्षिभिःसह including sages, अद्भुतम् wonderful, दुष्करम् most difficult, तत् that is, राघवकर्म Rama's action, समीक्ष्य seeing, सहसा at once, रामम् to Rama, उपेत्य, reached towards, सुशुभैः auspicious, जलैः water, पृथक् each one separately, तम् him, अभ्यषिञ्चन् sprinkled
6::22::71::नरदेव god of human beings, शत्रून् enemies, जयस्व win, ससागरम् ocean, मेदिनीम् the whole land, शाश्वतीः ever, स्समाः, पालय you rule, इतीव thus, नरदेवसत्कृतम् one who is respected by human as well as gods, रामम् Rama, शुभैः be auspicious, विविधैः several, वचोभिः words, अपूजयन् worshipped.
