6::73::1::Then the Rakshasas who survived the killings, hurriedly reported to the Rakshasa king, Ravana about the killing of Devanthaka, Trisira and Atikaya.
6::73::2::There upon the king, getting to know suddenly about the dreadful killing of his son and brother lost his senses. His eyes were filled with tears, and he was thinking seriously.
6::73::3::Thereafter, seeing the desperate Rakshasa king immersed in a sea of sorrow, Indrajith, son of Ravana, foremost of the chariot riders, submitted as follows.
6::73::4::Dear king of Rakshasas! Do not give way to despair when Indrajith is alive. Indeed, struck by Indrajith's arrows in battle it is not possible for anyone to be with life.
6::73::5::Now you will see Rama along with Lakshmana also, their body torn into pieces along with their army their life ceased, lying on the ground pierced with arrows all over the limbs.
6::73::6::Listen to this vow of Indra's enemy, which is fully determined and combined with manliness and divinity. I shall put an end to Rama and Lakshmana with my wonderful arrows.
6::73::7::Today, Indra, Vishnu, Mitra, Sadhyas, Vysvanara, moon and Sun will witness my immeasurable prowess as they witnessed the terrible prowess of Vishnu at the fire sacrifice of Bali.
6::73::8::(Indrajith) having spoken in that manner, taking leave of the king, the enemy of Indra (the ruler of gods), ascended the chariot swift as wind in speed, drawn by the best of donkeys.
6::73::9::Highly energetic he (Indrajith) was, a tamer of enemies, seated in the chariot that was like Indra's, quickly went to the battlefield from there.
6::73::10::Many Rakshasas of terrific valour, endowed with extraordinary strength, happily, wielding excellent bows, taking barbed missiles, hammers, whetted axes, maces, Bhusandi mallets, Ayasthis, Sataghnis, and Parighas, making noise, went following great Indrajith. Some went on the back of elephants and horses, tigers as large as mountains, scorpions, cats, donkeys, and camels. As well as on serpents, lions, tigers, and jackals.
6::73::11::The Rakshasas went on praising the enemy of Indra, Indrajith, making noise, blowing conchs in full blast, beating drums.
6::73::12::He, the destroyer of foes went with white parasols like a full moon shine in the sky.
6::73::13::Thereafter the chief hero went decked with golden ornaments, fanned by archers holding whisks with gold handles.
6::73::14::Ravana, the prosperous king of Rakshasas, seeing his son sallying forth surrounded by huge army spoke.
6::73::15::Son! there is no adversary who can fight with you sitting in a chariot. Indra has been won by you. What to say about mortals like Rama who can be assailed by you.Rakshasa king having spoken that way, Indrajith accepted the blessings and departed.
6::73::16::Then Lanka shone like the Sun in the sky with Indrajith who was effulgent like the Sun and matchless in valour shone.
6::73::17::Upon reaching the battlefield, he, the tamer of foes, highly energetic Indrajith, ranged the Rakshasas around the chariot.
6::73::18::Then the foremost of Rakshasas, who was like fire god in brilliance worshipped fire god with chanting of mantras as per tradition.
6::73::19::The heroic Rakshasa king worshipped according to tradition with flowers and fragrance followed by parched grain and fire god.
6::73::20::In that fire sacrifice, weapons were leaves, bibika sticks were fuel, red pieces of cloth were used, and in the same way the ladle for sacrifice was made of iron.
6::73::21::There he strewed into the fire, lances as leaves, dark coloured live go at clasped by its neck and consigned.
6::73::22::From the fire set ablaze by the of fearing of fire sticks into it was free from smoke burst into flames indicating victory.
6::73::23::The fire god himself, decked in polished gold ornaments turned round and accepted the offerings.
6::73::24::He, with whom weapons are adept invoked weapon presided over by Brahma and charged his own chariot with it.
6::73::25::While the missile was being invoked and fire sacrifice was done, all planets, moon, Sun, and Stars in the sky shook in fear.
6::73::26::Flaming like fire god, endowed with the prowess of Indra, possessing inconceivable form, Indrajith with his bow, arrows and chariot disappeared into the sky.
6::73::27::Then, the Rakshasa army filled with horses and chariots, graced with pennants and flags, desiring to fight went roaring aloud.
6::73::28::They began to strike Vanaras, with many wonderfully decorated, sharp and swift arrows, lances, and tridents.
6::73::29::Thereafter enraged Ravana's son looking at the Rakshasas said, Be happy and kill the Vanaras in fight.
6::73::30::Thereafter the Rakshasas roaring and longing for victory rained arrows in a terrific manner at the Vanaras.
6::73::31::Indrajith, remaining concealed and surrounded by Rakshasas, destroyed the Vanaras with nalikas, steel arrows and maces.
6::73::32::Struck in the battle by Indrajith, the Vanaras rained heavily armed with trees and rocks.
6::73::33::Mighty and energetic son of Ravana, Indrajith became angry and began to attack the Vanaras.
6::73::34::Filled with anger, Indrajith alone with nine, five, seven arrows tore the Vanaras into pieces.
6::73::35::Hero Indrajith, who is difficult to conquer in battle, killed the Vanaras with sun like arrows decorated with gold.
6::73::36::Pierced by arrows in the battle, those Vanaras with their necks broken, giving up hopes of winning, frustrated, fell like the demons oppressed by great gods.
6::73::37::Then the bulls among Vanaras rushed in the battlefield towards Indrajith whose arrows were dreadful and blazing like the Sun 's rays.
6::73::38::Then Vanaras with their bodies broken, courage and consciousness lost, blood flowed from mutilated bodies.
6::73::39::Vanaras, armed with rocks in the battle, roaring and not turning back, stood for the cause, giving up their life.
6::73::40::The Vanaras retreated back to the battle and rained on Ravana's son, trees, mountains and rocks.
6::73::41::Energetic Indrajith, who is ever victorious in battle dispersed the deadly rain of rocks and trees capable of taking out life.
6::73::42::Then the Lord of Rakshasas dispersed the complete army of Vanaras with arrows burning like fire and resembling venomous serpents.
6::73::43::He shattered Gandhamadana with eighteen very sharp arrows and Nala standing at far with nine arrows.
6::73::44::Indrajith, the eminent hero, hurt Mainda in private parts and even afflicted Gaja with five spades in the battle.
6::73::45::Then he struck Jambavan with ten, Neela with thirty, and Sugriva, Rshaba and Angada. In the same way Dwivida with sharp and terrific arrows that were bestowed upon him as boons and made them lose consciousness.
6::73::46::Highly enraged like the fire at the time of universal destruction, he tormented many chiefs of Vanaras and others.
6::73::47::He, with his swift moving arrows, bright like the Sun , stretching to the ear hurt many vanaras in that great war.
6::73::48::Seeing the vast Vanara army deluded by the net of arrows, Indrajith was very happy.
6::73::49::Highly energetic, mighty, and swift Indrajith raining sharp arrows and weapons quickly Devastated the Vanara army.
6::73::50::Leaving from his own army space, moving swiftly, remaining concealed in the blue sky like a rain cloud, Indrajith rained a net of arrows.
6::73::51::In the battle, the Vanaras who were like mountains, became victims of cheating, and were struck by Indrajith's thunderbolt like arrows. Their bodies were broken and shrieking in discordant tones they fell like mountains.
6::73::52::The Vanara troops saw only the sharp pointed arrows covering them. They could not see the enemy of Indra being concealed by magical power.
6::73::53::Thereafter the mighty Lord of Rakshasas despatched volley of sharp tipped arrows bright like the Sun, at Vanara leaders on all sides and eradicated.
6::73::54::He rained a violent shower of tridents, swords and axes burning like sacrificial fire shedding flames with fire sparks on the Vanara army.
6::73::55::Struck by Indrajith's arrows, the (bodies of) Vanara troops were glowing like Kimsuka trees (red in colour) bearing flowers.
6::73::56::Hit by the Rakshasa king, the bulls among Vanaras gliding towards one another roared in discordant tones and fell down.
6::73::57::Some Vanaras looking up to the sky eyes pierced with arrows held one another and fell on the ground.
6::73::58::Indrajith, the foremost of the Rakshasas, with lances, tridents, sharp arrows charged with mantras pierced at all the tigers among Vanaras --Hanuman, Sugriva, Angada, Gandhamadanam, Jambavantha, Sushena, Vegadarsi, Mainda, Dwivida, Neela, Gavaksha, Vidyuuhamshtra, and monkeys Suryanana, Jyothimukha, Dadhimukha, Pavaksha, and also Nala, Kumuda.
6::73::59::Having hurt the Vanara leaders with maces and arrows shining like gold, he rained volley of arrows shining like sun rays on Lakshmana and Rama.
6::73::60::Most wonderful and prosperous Rama, looking at the rain of arrows continuing to shower, not minding it as if they are rain of water drops, spoke this to Lakshmana.
6::73::61::Lakshmana! Rakshasa king, an enemy of Indra afflicted the Vanaras with the Brahmastram secured by him. Using that power, he is tormenting us with sharp arrows.
6::73::62::How can it be possible now to destroy that great Indrajith who is conferred with boons of invincibility by the creator Brahma, who is steadfast and is concealed in dreadful form with weapons uplifted?
6::73::63::This weapon of him (Indrajith) is that of the glorious creator and is presided by Him. By that reason he is inconceivable. O! Wise Lakshmana, remain calm and undisturbed at this hail of arrows.
6::73::64::This Rakshasa king is covered thickly with volley of arrows on all sides. Able warriors of Vanaras are falling and not happy.
6::73::65::This Indrajith is desisting from comb at on seeing us. As the Vanaras have lost pride and happiness and fallen into unconscious state, he would surely think that he has attained prosperity after victory in war and surely enter Lanka, the abode of enemies of god.
6::73::66::Seeing the two princes severed and fallen down struck by the net of arrows of Indrajith, he roared happily in the battle.
6::73::67::Thereafter Vanara army withdrew from the battle along with Rama and Lakshmana. Indrajith for his part moved to the abode protected by Ravana's arms, while being praised. He at once entered the city happily and related everything to the father.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेत्रिसप्ततितमस्सर्गः ।।This is the Seventy third sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by Sage Valmiki.
