6::42::1::तत then, राक्षसा Rakshasas, स्तत्र there, रावणमन्दिरम् Ravana's abode, गत्वा proceeding to, रामेण Rama's, वानरैः Vanaras, सह along with, रुद्धां occupied, न्यवेदय informed, न्पुरीं total city.
6::42::2::रुद्धां occupied, तु also, नगरीं city, श्रुत्वा hearing, जातक्रोधो very furious, निशाचरः night ranger, विधानं knowing, द्विगुणं twice, श्रुत्वा hearing, प्रासादं top of the mansion, अध्यरोहत planning for the protection of Lanka.
6::42::3::स: he, युद्धकाङ्क्षिभिः desirous of combat, असङ्ख्येयै countless numbers, हर्रिगणैः troops of Vanaras, सशैलवनकाननाम् mountains and forests, सर्वतो all over, अवृतां occupied, लङ्कां Lanka, ददर्शा observed.
6::42::4::स: he, वानरैः Vanaras, सर्वां all, वसुधां earth, कवलीकृताम् occupied, दृष्ट्वा seeing, कथं how, स्युरिति thought, क्षपयितव्याः to destroy, चिन्तापरो thinking, अभवत् started.
6::42::5::स: he, रावणः Ravana, सुचिरं for long, चिन्तयित्वा thinking over, धैर्यमालम्ब्य picking up courage, अयतलोचनः with thoughtful eyes, राघवं Raghava, हरियूथांश्च at the Vanaras, ददर्शा saw.
6::42::6::राघवः Raghava, मुदितो happily, सहसैन्येन with army, पुप्लुवे near, लङ्कां Lanka, सर्वतो all over, राक्षसैर्वृताम् fully filled with Rakshasas, गुप्तांवै protected, लङ्कां Lanka, ददर्श witnessed.
6::42::7::दाशरथि son of Dasaratha, चित्रध्वजपताकिनीम् decorated with flags and posts, लङ्कां Lanka, चेतसा thinking, सीतां of Sita, दूयमानेन worried, सहसा very much, जगाम remained.
6::42::8::अत्र here, सा she, मृगशावाक्षी dove eyed, जनकात्मजा Janaka's daughter, पीड्यते tormented, मत्कृते because of me, शोकसन्तप्ता immersed in sorrow, कृशा emaciated, स्थण्डिलशायिनी without food struggling.
6::42::9::धर्मात्मा righteous, स: he (Rama), पीड्यमानां pained, वैदेहीम Vaidehi, अचिन्तयन् thinking of very much, क्षिप्रमाज्ञापयामास immediately ordered, वानरान् Vanaras, द्विषतां enemies, वधे to kill.
6::42::10::क्लिष्टकर्मणा one who does not cause sorrow, एवमुक्ते having ordered that way तु, वचने his words, प्लवगाः monkeys, संघर्षमाणाः getting ready for war, सिम्हनादैरनादयन् roared like a lion
6::42::11::हरियूथपाः Vanara troops, लङ्कां Lanka, शिखरैर्विकिरामैनां with mountain peaks, मुष्टिभिरेववा or with fists, इति this, स्मदधिरे will crush, सर्वे all, मनांसि thought.
6::42::12::हरियूथपाः Vanara leaders, गिरिशृङ्गाणि mountains, शिखराणि peaks, तरूंश्चोत्पाट्य holding trees, महान्तिच huge, विविधां many kinds, स्तिष्ठन्ति ready to fight.
6::42::13::राक्षसेन्द्रस्य king of Rakshasas, प्रेक्षतो as he was looking, तान्यनीकानि all the Vanara army, राघवप्रियकामार्थं to make Rama happy, भागशः in divisions, लङ्काम Lanka, आरुरुहुस्तदा ascended the boundary.
6::42::14::ताम्रवक्त्रा having copper colour faces, हेमाभा golden coloured, रामार्थे for the sake of Rama, त्यक्तजीविताः giving up life, सालतालशिलायुधाः Sala, Tala trees and rocks as weapons, लङ्कामेवाभ्यवर्तन्त went to Lanka.
6::42::15::ते they (Vanaras ), द्रुमैः trees, पर्वताग्रैश्च peaks of mountains, मुष्टिभिश्च even with fists, प्लवङ्गमाः monkeys, प्राकाराग्रा top of boundary, अरण्यानि forests, ममन्थुस्तोरणानिच gateways of the city
6::42::16::वानराः Vanaras, पारिखाः with soil, पर्वताग्रैश्च with mountain peaks, तृणैः with grass, काष्ठैश्च wooden pieces, पांसुभिः moats also, प्रसन्नसलिलायुताः with pure water, पूरयन्ति filled.
6::42::17::ततः then, वानराः Vanaras, सहस्रयूथाश्च thousand, कोटीयूथाश्च one crore, कोटीशतयुताश्चान्ये hundred crores, लङ्काम into Lanka, आरुरुहुस्तदा ascended then.
6::42::18::काञ्चनानि golden, प्रमृद्नन्तस्तोरणानि breaking the gateways, कैलासशिखराभानि like the peaks of Kailasa mountain, गोपुराणि towers, प्रमथ्यच crushing, प्लवङ्गमाः monkeys went.
6::42::19::आप्लवन्तः jumping here and there, महावारणसंनिभाः like huge elephants, प्लवन्तश्च Vanaras, गर्जन्तश्च roaring like lion, लङ्कांतामभिधावन्ति went up to Lanka.
6::42::20::जयत्य victorious, अतिबलो exceedingly strong, रामो Rama, महाबलः endowed with supreme, strength, लक्ष्मणश्च Lakshmana also, राजा king, जयति victorious, सुग्रीवो Sugriva, राघवेण by Raghava, अभिपालितः protected by on all sides.
6::42::21::कामरूपिणः who could change their form at will, इत्येवं in this manner, घोषयन्तश्च shouting, गर्जन्तश्च roaring, लङ्कायाः into Lanka, प्राकारं defensive walls, अभ्यधावन्त rushed over.
6::42::22::वीरबाहुः Veerabahu, सुबाहुश्च and Subahu, नल Nala, वनगोचरः foremost of monkeys, निपीड्योप storming, निविष्टास्ते defensive, प्राकारं boundary walls, हरियूथपाः Vanara leaders, एतस्मिन्नन्तरे in the meantime inside, चक्रुः went, स्कन्धावारनिवेशनम् remained stationed at northeast.
6::42::23::कुमुदः Kumuda, तु also, कोटीभि one crore, र्दशभि ten, आर्वृतः surrounded by, पूर्वद्वारं east gate, आवृत्य surrounded, बलवां mighty, स्तस्थौ remained, हरिभि monkeys also, र्जितकाशिभिः appearing victorious.
6::42::24::प्रघसो Praghasa, हरिः monkey, महाबाहु broad shouldered, पनसश्च Panasa also, वानर Vanaras, साहाय्यार्थं for assisting, तस्यैव himself, निविष्टः encamped, बहुभि many, आर्वृतः surrounded.
6::42::25::वीरः valiant, शतबलिः Satabali, कपिः monkey, विंशत्या twenty, कोटिभि crores, आवृत्य surrounded by, बलवांस्तस्थौ stood besieging, दक्षिणं south, द्वारमागम्य reached the gate.
6::42::26::गतस्तारापिता father of Tara (wife of Vali), बलवांस्तस्थौ the mighty, सुषेणः Sushena, आवृत्य along with, षष्टिकोटिभिरावृतः sixty crores of monkeys surrounding, पश्चिमद्वारं at the western gate.
6::42::27::उत्तरंद्वारमासाद्य reaching north gate, रामः Rama, सौमित्रिणा Saumithri, सह along with, आवृत्य accompanied by, बलवांस्तस्थौ blockading the gate, हरीश्वरः Lord of monkeys, सुग्रीवश्च Sugriva.
6::42::28::महाकायो of gigantic body, गवाक्षो Gavaksha, भीमदर्शनः of fierce appearance, गोलाङ्गूलो Golangula species of monkeys, कोट्या crore, वृतः surrounded by, महावीर्यस्तस्थौ of extraordinary virility, रामस्य Rama's, पार्श्वतः by the side of.
6::42::29::वृतः accompanied by, कोट्या one crore, ऋक्षाणां bears, भीमवेगानां of redoubtable fury, धूम्रः Dhumra (brother of Jambavan), शत्रुनिबर्हणः exterminator of his foes, महावीर्यस्तस्थौ endowed with extraordinary valour, रामस्य Rama's, पार्श्वतः by the side of.
6::42::30::वृतो accompanied by, सन्नद्धस्तु defensive clamour, महावीर्यो of extraordinary virility, गदापाणि wielding mace, विर्भीषणः Vibheeshana, यस्तैस्तु stood, सचिवैस्तस्थौ with ministers stood, तत्र there, महाबलः mighty.
6::42::31::गजो Gaja, गवाक्षो Gavaksha, गवयः Gava, शरभ Sarabha, गन्धमादनः Gandamadhana, मन्तात्परिधावन्तो all over wandering, ररक्षु protecting, हर्रिवाहिनीम् monkey troops.
6::42::32::ततः thereafter, राक्षसेश्वरः Lord of Rakshasas, रावण Ravana, सर्वसैन्यानां all his forces, निर्याणं to depart, कोपपरीतात्मा overcome by fury, द्रुत to advance, आज्ञापयत्तदा ordered.
6::42::33::रावणस्य from Ravana's, मुखोद्गतम् command issued from his mouth, एतच्छ्रुत्वा as soon as it was heard, ततो that, वाक्यं words. सहसा instantly, भीमनिर्घोषमुद्घुष्टं terrific roar, रजनीचरैः night rangers.
6::42::34::ततः then, प्रचोदिता shone, भेर्यश्चन्द्र like the moon, पाण्डरपुष्कराः white discs, भीमा terrific, राक्षसानां Rakshasas, हेमकोणाहता gold sticks.
6::42::35::राक्षसानां Rakshasas, सुघोराणां terrific sounds, शतसहस्रशः hundred thousand, महाघोषाः loud noise, शङ्खाः with conchs, विनेदुश्च sonorous, मुखमारुत with wind from their mouth, पूरिताः blown.
6::42::36::ते they, बभुः brilliant, शुभनीलाङ्गाः dark limbs, रजनीचराः night rangers, सशङ्खा with conches, इवाम्बुदाः like clouds, विद्युन्मण्डलसन्नद्धाः provided with armour with flashes of lightning, सबलाका accompanied by herons.
6::42::37::रावणचोदिताः urged by Ravana, सैन्या army, ततः then, हृष्टा joyfully, निष्पतन्ति rushed forth, वेगा swiftly, महोदधेः great ocean, इव like, समये at the time of, पूर्यमाणस्य universal destruction.
6::42::38::ततो thereafter, वानरसैन्येन by the Vanara army, मुक्तो emitted, नादः sound, समन्ततः on all sides, पूरितो filled, मलयः Malaya mountain, येन by that, स that, सानुप्रस्थकन्दरः major and minor peaks and caves.
6::42::39::शङ्खदुन्दुभिसंघुष्टः blast of conchs and roll of drums, सिम्हनाद roar of lions, स्तरस्विनाम् and of Vanara and Rakshasa heroes, पृथिवीं earth, चान्तरिक्षंच to sky, सागरंचैव up to ocean, नादयन् resounded.
6::42::40::गजानां of elephants, बृंहितैः trumpeting, सार्धंहयानां neighing of horses, हेषितैरपि clatter of wheels, रथानां of chariots, नेमिघोषैश्च shout of, रक्षसाम्, Rakshasas, वदनस्वनः resounded in the air.
6::42::41::एतस्मिन्नन्तरे in the meantime, घोरः dreadful, सङ्ग्रामः conflict, समवर्तत all over, रक्षसां Rakshasas, वानराणांच between Vanaras, यथादेवासुरे like the conflict between Devas and asuras, पुरा earlier.
6::42::42::ते the Rakshasas, स्वविक्रमान् vaunting their own prowess, गदाभिः with maces, प्रदीप्ताभिः flaming शक्तिशूलपरश्वधैः with javelins, tridents and pikes, निजघ्नु fiercely struck, नरान्घोराः at Vanaras, कथयन्तः attacked.
6::42::43::राजा king, जयति victory, सुग्रीव Sugriva, इति thus, शब्दो sound, महानभूत् be triumphant, राजन् king, जय victorious, जयेत्युक्त्वा saying victory to you, स्वस्वनामकथान्ततः arose war cry from the Vanaras.
6::42::44::तथा in the same manner, वृक्षैर्महाकायाः with trees, पर्वताग्रैश्च with mountain peaks, वानराः Vanaras, रक्षांसि at Rakshasas, नखैर्दन्तैश्च with nails and teeth, निजघ्नुस्तानि attacked, वेगिताः swiftly.
6::42::45::राक्षसास्त्वपरे redoubtable Rakshasas, प्राकारस्था standing on the walls, भीमाः dreadful, भिन्दिपालैश्च Bhindipalas (javelin like weapons), खड्गैश्च and swords, शूलैश्चैव with tridents, व्यदारयन् pierced.
6::42::46::प्राकारस्थान्महीगताः stationed on the boundary walls, वानराश्चापि Vanaras also, राक्षसान्पातयामासुः dragged down the Rakshasas, प्लवङ्गमाः monkeys, समाप्लुत्य jumping up.
6::42::47::स that, सम्प्रहार conflict, रक्षसां of Rakshasas, वानराणांच and Vanaras, तमुलो intense, मांस flesh, शोणित blood, कर्दमः like mire, सम्बभूवा that happened, अद्भुतोपमाः was amazing.
