6::99::1::Gazing at Mahodara killed by Sugriva, mighty Mahaparsva's eyes turned red in anger. He created a commotion in the army of Angada.
6::99::2::That leader (Mahaparsva) severed the heads of Vanara leaders from their body just as wind drops fruits from stalks.
6::99::3::Then with his arrows, that Rakshasa (Mahaparsva) shattered the arms of some, shoulders of some, sides, and ribs of some Vanaras.
6::99::4::By the rain of arrows of Mahaparsva, the Vanaras were dejected and wore a sad look on their face and lost senses.
6::99::5::Observing the army oppressed by the Rakshasa leader, Angada, endowed with broad shoulders, exhibited his might speedily like the ocean on full moon days.
6::99::6::The foremost of the Vanaras (Angada), taking an iron bar flung on Mahaparsva in the battlefield.
6::99::7::By that hit, Mahaparsva became unconscious and fell on the ground, senseless, from the chariot along with the charioteer.
6::99::8::Jambavantha, the mighty king of Bears, rushed from his army that looked like a dark cloud. The great hero with his army resembling a heap of black mountain, in his fury seized a huge rock resembling a mountain peak, crushed the chariot and struck the horses.
6::99::9::In a short while, regaining consciousness, mighty Mahaparsva struck Angada again with many shafts.
6::99::10::Mahaparsva pierced three shafts into the chest of Jambavantha and attacked Gavaksha with many arrows.
6::99::11::Seeing Gavaksha and Jambavantha afflicted by shafts, deluded with anger, Angada took hold of a dreadful iron bar.
6::99::12::Vali's son Angada got enraged, seized an iron bar which shone like the radiant sun's rays and stood at a distance to kill Mahaparsva. Angada whirling the iron bar round and round hurled it around and thrown at Mahaparsva.
6::99::13::That iron bar hurled by Angada hit the forehead of the Rakshasa.
6::99::14::Courageous son of Vali, enraged, with all speed, slapped the Rakshasa's ear adorned with shining earrings, with his palm.
6::99::15::Angry Mahaparsva, who was endowed with speed and shining brightly, took hold of an extraordinary battle axe in one hand.
6::99::16::Extremely enraged Rakshasa, hurled at Vali's son that axe that was cleansed with oil, the clean strong axe that was like feet of a mountain.
6::99::17::Angada, full of fury, escaped Mahaparsva's aim to strike his left shoulder blade in violence.
6::99::18::Angada, who was equal to his father in his prowess, was highly furious and himself clenched his fist which resembled thunderbolt.
6::99::19::Angada who knew the vital parts, pierced into the middle of the breasts of the Rakshasa into the heart by his fist which was equal to Indra's thunderbolt.
6::99::20::In that great conflict, struck by the fist, the Rakshasa (Mahaparsva's) heart broke and killed and fell on the ground.
6::99::21::Mahaparsva having fallen down in the battle, the army was bewildered, and Ravana was overcome with anger.
6::99::22::Highly rejoiced Vanaras roared in high pitch sound. The tall attics and gates of Lanka vibrated with sound. Even the gods, accompanied by Indra, made great sounds.
6::99::23::Then Ravana, the enemy of Indra, hearing the great sound made by the three dwellers of heaven of forest and of Rakshasas, reacting violently again, prepared for war.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेनवनवतितमस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the ninety ninth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
