6::3::1::Rama the scion of Kakuthsa dynasty having accepted the wellmeaning words of Sugriva, who spoke the truth with deep understanding, turned to Hanuman and said.
6::3::2::By austerity or by drying up the ocean or by any other means, I am capable of crossing the ocean. 
6::3::3::O Vanara How many forts are in Lanka? You may tell me whatever you have seen. I wish to know all that.
6::3::4::Tell me in detail about the strength and size of the army, the number of gateways that are difficult to enter, the way in which the entrances have been protected by the rakshasas, and their dwellings in Lanka. Indeed you are aware of all aspects and are also capable. 
6::3::5::Hanuman the son of Maruti, the foremost among those who are good at speech, having heard Rama's words again said to Rama.
6::3::6::I will relate the way in which the city of Lanka is fortified, the way in which it is protected by secret forces, everything you wish to hear. 
6::3::7::Hanuman, the foremost of the vanaras said that he will truly point out everything in Lanka:Ravana's power, the affection of rakshasas to Ravana, his prosperity, the terrifying ocean, the divisions of the army such as chariots, elephants, horses and soldiers.
6::3::8::The people in the vast island of Lanka are very delighted. Lanka is filled with chariots and innumerable rakshasas.
6::3::9::Lanka is endowed with lofty wide courtyards, entrances with doors that are fixed with metal fixtures and large iron bars.
6::3::10::The doors are fitted with powerful machines which retaliate by discharging darts and stones on the enemy's army and kill them.
6::3::11::At the entrances are troops of terrific looking guards kept ready with a hundred sharpened stones studded with iron spikes.
6::3::12::Its lofty golden boundary wall encrusted here and there with gems, corals, Vaiduryas and pearls is difficult to assail.
6::3::13::All round it (boundary wall) are very splendid moats filled with frighteningcold water inhabited by fish and crocodiles.
6::3::14::At the entrance of the gateways around the moats are four road ways. Huge engines are fixed to move the bridges when people approach. There are rows of houses (for the guards) at the gateways.
6::3::15::When the enemy arrives, the engines all over the moats lift the bridges making entry impossible for enemy armies.
6::3::16::One of the road ways is very strong and steady, shining with unshakeable golden pillars and altars.
6::3::17::O Rama Ravana, who is hostile in his intentions, assuming his natural tendency which is eagerness to combat, is always very alert and looks after the army.
6::3::18::Lanka is difficult to access even for devatas located on high peaks of the mountain. It is fierce to onlookers, surrounded by four kinds of forts, like rivers, mountains, forests and artificial fortresses.  
6::3::19::O Raghava Lanka is located on the other shore of the ocean. Passage through the sea is not possible. It is away from all and there is nothing around.
6::3::20::It is inaccessible like the abode of devatas as it is on the peak of the mountain. It is difficult to conquer for any one as it is full of horses and elephants. 
6::3::21::Evil minded Ravana's city of Lanka is shining with moats and missiles of many kinds and machinery.
6::3::22::There(in Lanka) ten thousand warriors are garrisoned at the eastern gate way holding tridents, and those who are unassailable in war stand in front with swords. 
6::3::23::At the southern gate also one lakh of rakshasas are garrisoned with four divisions of army. They are also the best warriors.
6::3::24::At the western gate are garrisoned ten lakhs of rakshasas wearing shields of skin and holding swords. They are knowledgeable in several weapons.
6::3::25::At the northern gate(of Lanka) are garrisoned one hundred crores of rakshasas constituting, charioteers, horse riding and elephant riding ogres born of noble families, respected and trustworthy (for Ravana).
6::3::26::Hundreds and thousands of warriors who are unassailable are collected in the center(of Lanka) in multitudes of crores.
6::3::27::I have destroyed some of those roadways, even filled up the moats, burnt parts of the city of Lanka, smashed the boundary walls and killed part of the powerful army.
6::3::28::If by whatever means the passage of ocean can be crossed by vanaras it can be taken for granted that the city of Lanka is destroyed.
6::3::29::Raghava What do we have to do with the rest of the army when Angada, Dwivida, Mainda, Jambavan, Panasa, Nala and the chief of the army Nila are there? Reaching Ravana's city by leaping over the mountains and demolishing the outer gates, other boundaries, archways and other buildings they will get into Lanka city.
6::3::30::You may command the total army this way.Quickly start at an opportune time towards Lanka (said Hanuman to Rama) commanded Hanuman.।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेतृतीयस्सर्गः।।This is the end of the third Sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic, the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
