6::39::1::The heroic leader of the monkeys kept awake that night on the Suvela and saw forests and gardens there in Lanka.
6::39::2::They were amazed to see the even terrain, beautiful and expansive, long, and continuous sanctuary lovely to look at being a feast to the eyes.
6::39::3::Thickly covered with trees like Champaka, Asoka, Punnaga, Sala, Tala, Samala and Tamala trees concealing the woods, surrounded with Nagamala trees all over  and Hintala, Arjuna and Neepa in full bloom, Saptaparni, Tilaka, Karnakara and Patala trees with crests laden with flowers, intertwined with creepers and wonderful variety of flowers trees with tender red leaves as if clothe d in red, flowers of diverse kind and similarly colourful Neela and Sadala as king of forest, it was shining like Amaravathi, capital of Indra.
6::39::4::Having reached there where trees bore fragrance, very beautiful flowers and fruits seemed as though humans were wearing ornaments.
6::39::5::Appearing like the chaitra chariot of Kubera, Nandana garden of Indra, green in all seasons filled with bees, the garden was a wonderful delight.
6::39::6::The Vanaras heard the singing of cuckoos, dancing of peacocks, crying of gallinules, lapwings and herons from the gardens abounding in cascades.
6::39::7::There after the rejoiced heroic Vanaras who can change their form at will happily entered the woods and gardens inhabited by birds in heat full of emotion, trees covered with cuckoos, and wandering bees, rendered noisy by birds, resounded with the singing of large black bees and bees going around clinging to trees, mingled with sounds of various birds and noise of cries of cranes.
6::39::8::Then the Vanaras of extraordinary energy, were enjoying the breeze redolent with the fragrance of flowers as they were entering, and the wind blew.
6::39::9::Some other monkey heroes permitted by Sugriva went to Lanka decorated with flags.
6::39::10::Other monkeys capable of roaring went into Lanka, spreading out terrifying the birds, dispiriting the deer and elephants by noise.
6::39::11::Those Vanaras endowed with speed went trampling down on the ground with force, the dust under their feet rose to the sky in a fraction of a second.
6::39::12::Alarmed by that sound the Bears, lions, pigs, elephants, buffaloes were frightened and went in all the ten directions.
6::39::13::Trikuta peak was fully covered with flowers, sparkled with gold, spread over a hundred yojanas, beautiful to look at, splendid and smooth. It is difficult even for birds to reach, for sages even in thought and difficult to access by any physical action. It is praiseworthy as if touching the sky alone.
6::39::14::Lanka ruled by Ravana was a hundred yojanas in breadth and thirty yojanas in length was seen.
6::39::15::The city of Lanka looked charming with tall towers resembling white cluster of clouds fortified with gold and silver.
6::39::16::The tall buildings decorated beautifully resembled air planes and were shining like heavy rainy clouds exposed to the sun. The building in the centre resembled the abode of Vishnu.
6::39::17::In that city, which was always protected fully by a hundred Rakshasas, there was a palace with thousand pillars, which looked like peak of mount Kailas, and was as though it was scraping the sky and it as like an ornament of Lanka, the city of Rakshasa's Lord.
6::39::18::Prosperous Rama, brother of Lakshmana along with Vanaras saw different kinds of forests, mountains filled with different kinds of minerals, delightful gardens endowed with different varieties of flowers, charming birds singing happily, frequented by a variety of deer, attended by Rakshasas. The city was blooming with prosperity.
6::39::19::Valiant brother of Lakshmana wondered seeing the city filled with great palaces, distinct like Lord Indra's city.
6::39::20::Accompanied by huge Vanara army, Rama saw in the city of Lanka rows of buildingspalaces, adorned with gems, gates fitted with huge machines for war and large army of Ravana.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकोनचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the thirty ninth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
