6::24::1::The army of Vanaras settled that way by Rama's command shone like the autumnal full moon with auspicious stars.
6::24::2::The frightened army (of Vanaras) that was like a tormented ocean started moving swiftly, shaking like the earth.
6::24::3::There upon having settled down, the army hordes heard from Lanka terrific and tumultuous noise of drums and percussion instruments that caused horripilation.
6::24::4::The leaders of Vanara troops felt very happy at the noise from (Lanka) which they were unable to tolerate and roared louder (than that in joy).
6::24::5::Even the Rakshasas heard the roaring of Vanaras in their pride that was bellowing like that of clouds in the sky.
6::24::6::Afflicted by sorrow upon seeing the colourful flags and posts of Lanka even Rama's thoughts went about thinking of Sita.
6::24::7::The doveeyed Sita is obstructed by Ravana there (at Lanka) like the planet Rohini is caught by the red coloured planet (Mars).
6::24::8::Heroic Rama heaving hot and long breath looking at Lakshmana spoke these words that were good for him at that time.
6::24::9::Lakshmana, you may see the city of Lanka elevated on top of the mountain as though clasping the sky, like the one created in the mind of Vishwakarma.
6::24::10::This Lanka appears splendid with a mass of skyscrapers like white clouds covering the path of Vishnu in the sky.
6::24::11::Lanka is filled with flocks of birds of several kinds singing sweetly, the gardens with charming flowers and fruits are delighting like auspicious gardens of Chaitrara, the garden of Kubera, the god of wealth.
6::24::12::You may see the trees shaking violently by the pleasant breeze, inhabited by proud birds, drunken honeybees and crowded with cuckoos and other birds (Rama said to Lakshmana).
6::24::13::Dasaratha's son Rama thus talked to Lakshmana in that manner and asked to divide the task of the army in accordance with what is said in sastras.
6::24::14::Let the valiant Angada who is difficult to win over, who is a terror to the enemies, take the army along with Nila and remain at the centre (of the army structure).
6::24::15::Let Rshaba the bull among Vanaras approach the south side of the army accompanied by his troop of Vanara contingent and remain there.
6::24::16::Let the mighty Gandhamadana, a difficult one to conquer like a proud elephant, take the battalion of army and stay on the right side
6::24::17::I and Lakshmana will be alert at the head side. Let Jambavan Sushena and the three chiefs of Bears who are strong and quick at sighting remain protecting the belly of the army.
6::24::18::Just as Pracheta who is covered by brilliance, rules the western side of the world, let the king of Vanaras protect the hips and loin portion of the Vanara army.
6::24::19::The Vanara army force organized that way to protect the Vanaras, shone like the mass of clouds in heaven.
6::24::20::Vanaras resolved to go taking peaks of mountains and huge trees to smash Lanka in war.
6::24::21::Thus resolved the Vanara leaders in their mind to crush Lanka with its mountain peaks into powder with their bare fists, indeed.
6::24::22::Having heard Sugriva, there after splendid Rama spoke thus. The army is divided (placed in position). Suka may be relieved.
6::24::23::Having heard Rama's words Sugriva, the mighty king of Vanaras was happy and relieved the envoy on the instruction of Rama.
6::24::24::Relieved by the word of Rama, tormented Suka who was highly terrified returned to the king of Rakshasas.
6::24::25::Laughing at Suka, Ravana spoke these words. Why are your wings fastened? Your wings have been clipped, it appears!. I suppose you have not fallen under the clutches of the fickle minded Vanaras!
6::24::26::Then Suka who was caught by fear, having been asked by the king, trembling away thus replied to the Rakshasa king. I went to the northern shore of the ocean and delivered gently the speech just as it was conveyed by you.
6::24::27::As soon as they saw me, the enraged Vanaras rising up (into the sky) took hold of me and started injuring me and slaying me.
6::24::28::O king of Rakshasas! It was not possible to negotiate there with the Vanaras). I had no opportunity to interrogate with them. By nature, Vanaras are violent and are highly furious.
6::24::29::The life of Viradha, Kabhanda and Khara has been taken away by Rama. Accompanied by Sugriva they have set their foot into Lanka for Sita's sake.
6::24::30::Mighty Raghava having crossed the salt sea and reached the shore of Rakshasas, organized them (Vanaras) and stood wielding a bow.
6::24::31::Thousands of army forces of monkeys and Bears resembling mountains and clouds have settled on the ground.
6::24::32::Alliance is not possible between Rakshasas and army of Bears and Vanaras, just as alliance is not possible between gods and demons.
6::24::33::They will reach the boundary wall. At once you may do one of the two that I suggest you do. I implore you either to give away Sita or give good battle.
6::24::34::Angry, redeyed Ravana, having heard Suka's words spoke as though he would burn him with his glance.
6::24::35::Even if gods, Gandharvas and demons come to wage war with me, even if all the worlds threaten me, I shall not give away Sita.
6::24::36::Just as drunken bees reach the trees with blossoms in spring when will my arrows attack Rama?
6::24::37::When will the glowing arrows from my quiver, that are fit to pierce in thousands, be able to goad Rama like the burning fire sticks goad the elephants?
6::24::38::Just as the rising Sun light obscures the radiance of all (other stars) when will I obscure him surrounded by his army?
6::24::39::I have the speed of the ocean and swiftness like the WindGod. Rama does not know this and desires to wage war with me.
6::24::40::Rama has not seen the poisonous arrows in my quiver in battle. Therefore, he is desiring comb at with me.
6::24::41::He has not known my valour in war. Entering the enemy's army holding my formidable Veena, making challenging sounds with the sharp heads of arrows, causing tumultuous noise like the sound of cry of destitute and frightened ones with iron arrows, I will play the Veena of my bow in hand.
6::24::42::It is not possible (to win over) for the thousand eyed Indra, or even Varuna, the god presiding over water, or even for Yama, the god of death and again even for Kubera the god of wealth to face the fire of my arrows (said Ravana to Suka).।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकावेयुध्दकाण्डेचतुर्विंशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the twenty fourth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic, the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
