6::98::1::In the major conflict, each one destroying the other army, it seemed like the midsummer lakes totally lost its water.
6::98::2::The Lord of Rakshasas, Ravana, became doubly angry by the destruction of his army and fall of Virupaksha.
6::98::3::Rakshasa's army was killed by Vanaras and drastically reduced. Seeing the adversary of God's grace, Ravana was agonized on witnessing it.
6::98::4::And then Ravana spoke to Mahodara who was close by, one who is difficult to encounter, saying  At this time the hope for my victory is centered in you.
6::98::5::O heroic Mahodara! Today, exhibit your valour by destroying the enemy army. Having received my subsistence, this is the time to repay. Fight well in war.
6::98::6::Having spoken like that by the king of Rakshasas, Mahodara entered the army of the enemy like a moth enters fire.
6::98::7::Thereafter, the mighty and brilliant Mahodara, in obedience to the word of the king, inspired by his own valour, went to fight with Vanaras.
6::98::8::The mighty Vanaras also seizing huge rocks entered into the frightening enemy army of the Rakshasas.
6::98::9::In that great war, enraged Mahodara with arrows decked in gold shattered the Vanaras by attacking on hands, legs, and thighs.
6::98::10::Thereafter, unable to bear the pain, those Vanaras hit by Rakshasas, went in ten directions and some went to Sugriva for refuge.
6::98::11::Seeing the great army of Vanaras defeated in the conflict, Sugriva rushed towards Mahodara.
6::98::12::Endowed with great energy, Sugriva, the monkey Lord, seizing a huge mountain like dreadful rock, hurled to kill Mahodara.
6::98::13::Then seeing the formidable rock coming towards him, he was not bewildered and immediately struck and broke it with his arrows.
6::98::14::That rock, struck by Mahodara fell on the ground shattered and broken into a thousand pieces.
6::98::15::Seeing the fragmented rock, Sugriva was deluded with anger, and tearing up a sala tree, he shattered on the Rakshasa (Mahodara) in the battlefield.
6::98::16::Mahodara, a scourge of enemy forces, who lacerated Sugriva in that manner, angry, made the tree fall on the ground.
6::98::17::Sugriva, picking up that glowing iron bar, exhibiting its top, whirling it around, struck the best of horses of Mahodara.
6::98::18::Then the hero, Mahodara, his horses destroyed, jumped from the great chariot, and took hold of a mace.
6::98::19::Both the heroes, Mahodara and Sugriva like two bulls holding mace and iron bar respectively, like clouds charged with lightning came roaring in the battlefield.
6::98::20::Then provoked by anger, the night ranger, Mahodara flung his mace at Sugriva which shone like the Sun.
6::98::21::In that terrible conflict, seeing the mace broken and falling, mighty Sugriva, whose eyes turned red in anger, lifted up his iron bar, struck at the mace of the Rakshasa. The mace fell on the ground and broke into pieces.
6::98::22::Then, energetic Sugriva picked from the ground a frightening steel club encrusted with gold on all sides.
6::98::23::Sugriva took up the steel club and hurled at Mahodara who took another mace and hit back. Both collided with each other and shattered they fell down on the surface of the earth.
6::98::24::Thereafter, both of them fully endowed with strength, with their weapons broken, who resembled glowing fires, fought with their fists.
6::98::25::Then both of them again and again striking each other slapping with palms fell down and rolled on the ground.
6::98::26::Then quickly getting up striking one another, both the heroes who have never been defeated, pushed each other by their arms.
6::98::27::Both being scourge of their enemies, both heroes wrestling were exhausted with fighting. Then the Rakshasa picked up a sword lying not far from there along with a shield.
6::98::28::Likewise, Sugriva endowed with speed, a champion of Vanaras, took up a huge sword fallen down with a shield.
6::98::29::Then the two, whose limbs ceased, who were knowledgeable in the use of weapons, furious, sprang forward in the battle, both with joy, roaring to destroy one another.
6::98::30::Enraged at one another, intent to win, both stretched forth at great speed, going from left to right in circles and encountered each other.
6::98::31::Mahodara, a warrior, evil minded one, endowed with great speed, hurled the sword on the shield of Sugriva.
6::98::32::While Mahodara was extracting the sword stuck to the head, Sugriva, the elephant of the monkeys, severed the head of Mahodara which was decked with earrings and helmet.
6::98::33::Mahodara's head severed and fell on the ground. Seeing that Rakshasa king's army ran from there.
6::98::34::Sugriva, the monkey leader having killed Mahodara, the Vanaras shouted in joy. The ten headed Ravana became enraged. Raghava was glad.
6::98::35::All the Rakshasas became dull and piteous with sad faces. Out of fear they ran.
6::98::36::Just as a part of a huge mountain thrown down, an unassailable Mahodara, fallen on the ground, shone there like Lakshmi, just as the Sun shines by his own radiance.
6::98::37::Thereafter, Suras, Siddhas, Yakshas of heaven and all beings on the land, great selves who were gazing at the battle felt highly delighted seeing the victory of the Vanara king in the forefront of the battlefield.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाडेअष्टानवतितमःसर्गः ।।This is the end of the ninety eighth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
