6::34::1::Thus, Sita's agony was put off by Saarana's consoling words and Sita was glad just as the parched earth was delighted with shower of rain.
6::34::2::Then Saarana who knew the right time to do so, wishing the welfare of her dear friend Sita and desirous of doing anything for her smiled before she started speaking.
6::34::3::Darkeyed Sita! I am eager to go (to Rama's presence) and communicate your welfare and message. I can return back hidden (from Ravana's view).
6::34::4::While I fly through the sky without any support, either the wind god or even Garuda will not be capable of following my movement.
6::34::5::When Saarana was telling Sita in that way, Sita's face which was earlier filled with tears became pleasant and she spoke again.
6::34::6::You are capable of flying through the sky or even going to the underworld. For my sake you will do what cannot be done also and that it is your bounden duty, is also known to me.
6::34::7::In my opinion, your duty for me is to go and find out what Ravana is doing now, if you are firmly resolved.
6::34::8::Ravana has the power of conjuring tricks, makes enemies cry. He is cruel, evil minded and deluding me as though he has drunk liquor.
6::34::9::He, that Ravana makes even the frightful Rakshasa care takers threaten me and reproach me repeatedly every day.
6::34::10::I am perturbed and doubtful (of my life). My mind is not at ease. Even though I am in Ashoka Grove I am disturbed.
6::34::11::Indeed, please tell me certainly in toot, whatever decision that enemy takes and everything. Be kind to me and tell.
6::34::12::Saarana who speaks sweetly, kept wiping Sita's face covered with tears gently and replied in this manner.
6::34::13::Janaki! If you think so, I shall go to Ravana secretly and find out his intention and return back.
6::34::14::Having said so to Sita, she (Saarana) moved closer (to Ravana) and heard Ravana's conversation with his ministers.
6::34::15::Having heard and known the intention of evilminded Ravana, she (Saarana) quickly reached the beautiful Ashoka grove.
6::34::16::On entering the Ashoka grove, she saw the daughter of Janaka eagerly waiting for her every moment, looking like Lord Vishnu's wife Lakshmi, who lost her lotus seat.
6::34::17::On seeing the kind Saarana returning, Sita was very glad. She embraced her and offered a seat herself.
6::34::18::Seated here happily reveals to me truly that cruel and evil minded Ravana's intention.
6::34::19::To the trembling Sita, Saarana narrated totally all the discussion Ravana had with the ministers.
6::34::20::O Vaidehi! Ravana's mother Kaikasi and the aged minister Aviddha advised the Lord of Rakshasas to release you.
6::34::21::Let Mythili be given back to the ruler of the people (Rama) offering good hospitality. The (killing of fourteen thousand Rakshasas) amazing performance at Janasthana by Rama should serve as sufficient proof to you (of the consequences).
6::34::22::Crossing the ocean, reaching Lanka, seeing Sita and killing Rakshasas in comb at was done by Hanuman. Which man can do this on earth?
6::34::23::Even though his mother and aged minister counselled Ravana, he is like a miser holding on treasure not inclined to set you free.
6::34::24::O Mythili! Ravana is not interested in liberating you unless he goes to the other world in combat. (It can't happen when he is alive) This is certain. There is no doubt about this.
6::34::25::This thought has come to him only to cause him death. Because of impending death, he is very steady in his mind. This Ravana will not be able to liberate you before his death and of the Rakshasas.
6::34::26::Rama will kill Ravana in war with his sharp arrows and take you back to Ayodhya, O darkeyed lady!
6::34::27::In the meantime (while Saarana was telling Sita) the sounds of drums and conchs combined with the clamour of Vanara troops was heard and it was as though the surface of the earth was shaking.
6::34::28::On hearing the sounds of Vanara troops, the Rakshasas present in Lanka became dull, overcome by depression, thinking that because of Ravana's mistakes they could not see any good prospects for them.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेचतुस्त्रिंशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the thirty fourth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by Valmiki.
