6::26::1::Perceiving the truthful and beneficial words spoken by Saarana, without hesitation, King Ravana replied.
6::26::2::Even if Devas, Gandharvas and Danavas put together attack me in war and not even for the fear of the whole world will I surrender Sita?
6::26::3::As you are vanquished by the noble Vanaras you are frightened like this and thinking it is good to surrender Sita.
6::26::4::What adversary can win me in war? You ought to know this, said Ravana. Then Ravana, the king of Rakshasas having spoken that way went up to the snow white palace which was of the height of many Palmira trees wishing to see (the Vanaras).
6::26::5::Deluded with anger Ravana along with both the spies observed the sea, the mountains and the woods crowded with monkeys in that region of the earth.
6::26::6::Ravana seeing the innumerable army force of monkeys which was impossible to count again enquired looking at Saarana.
6::26::7::Who among the Vanaras is foremost, who is valiant, strong in prowess and most energetic? Who are their equals in the earlier war, you may tell in order?
6::26::8::Whose advice does Sugriva listen to? Who is the chief of the army of Vanaras? Saarana, I wish to know truly.
6::26::9::Hearing the words asked by Rakshasendra, Saarana, who knew the important ones, thus spoke out about the important monkey leaders.
6::26::10::Who, surrounded by thousands of troops is roaring aloud facing Lanka, with whose roar entire Lanka with its boundary walls, archways, mountains and woods are trembling, that one who stands in the forefront of Sugriva the Lord of all Vanara troops is known as the great Nila.
6::26::11::The valiant one who has lifted his arms up and stands on the earth enraged facing Lanka, a highly excited one who is tall and expanded like a mountain peak in form and colour of lotus filament who is hitting his tail again and again on the earth and making noise with his tail, which is resounding in ten directions is Vanara leader by name Angada who has been crowned by Sugriva. This crowned prince is challenging to have war with you.
6::26::12::He is the son of Vali and is similar to him and is ever beloved of Sugriva. Jus t like Varuna fights for the cause of Indra, he is ready to show his valour for the cause of Rama.
6::26::13::He is a well wisher of Raghava, called Hanuman. He had come to see Janaka's daughter, and his intellect is the cause for all that.
6::26::14::This valiant Vanara himself with many troops and several battalions of the Vanara king is marching to crush you.
6::26::15::Behind this Vali's son is Nala surrounded by a huge army force. He is heroic in war. He is the cause of construction of the bridge.
6::26::16::Ten hundred crores one lakh and eight of these warriors who are unassailable, cruel, dreadful and terrible prowess are following the Vanara leader. They have made their body stiff, tossing their limbs, and are roaring in anger. They are standing up and stretching their limbs in sandalwood forest. Nala the leader alone is wishing to crush the army and Lanka.
6::26::17::One who resembles silver in colour is Swetha. He is an intelligent one with terrific prowess, and a warrior is well known in the three worlds. Swetha is quickly coming towards Sugriva, dividing the Vanara army forces and again proceeding swiftly.
6::26::18::He who was residing on the banks of Gomathi earlier, which was delightful with a range of mountain peaks extending far, was ruling this kingdom from the mountain Sankochana. He is Kumuda by name. He drags his troops delightfully the ones with hairy long tails, some of coppery red colour, some yellow and some with white tails. Such a Vanara called Kumuda is dragging hundred thousand Vanaras, some fastened and some scattered. He is one who has no pity and is frightening to look at. Single handed he is aspiring to crush Lanka with its army in war.
6::26::19::O king! He who is like a lion, of tawny colour with long hair, who is steady, who is looking at Lanka as though he is going to burn with his eyes, he who is followed by thirty hundred thousand Vanara warriors of dreadful form and terrific valour are marching to crush Lanka, is called Rambha the leader of the troop. He was always ruling over Vindhya, Krishnagiri and Sudarsanam mountains.
6::26::20::Oh! king of Rakshasas! He who has made his ears stiff, yawning again and again, who is not afraid of death, who will not go back from war, who is looking obliquely and seeing his tail reacting in anger violently and roaring like a lion is a very strong leader called Sarabha. He is a very fast one, a leader of troops, ever in delight. He lives in Salveya mountain.
6::26::21::O King! Under him are forty lakhs of strong warriors known as Viharas.
6::26::22::He who is huge like a cloud covering the sky, roaring like a lion making noise like the beating of the drums, who is eager to wage war, who stands amid Vanaras like Indra in the midst of suras, who is ever difficult to resist in war is known as Panasa is a great warrior. He resides in the Paariyatra mountains.
6::26::23::Fifty lakhs of best warriors are under him. They are in separate units.
6::26::24::He who is stationed there on the shore like a second sea fluttering the division of army and terrifying is known as Vinata. He is a leader who goes about drinking the waters of the Parnasa, the best among the rivers. He has a sixty hundred thousand army force of Vanaras under him.
6::26::25::The valiant and powerful troop leaders are a part of units of the army under Vanara called Krodhana. He is challenging you for combat.
6::26::26::He who is of an orange colour body of hand some form, who nourishes it ever and who is proud of his strength, a glorious one known as Gava ya is coming towards you angrily with disregard for Vanaras.
6::26::27::He has seventy lakhs under his command. Single handed with army force is aspiring to crush Lanka.
6::26::28::They are difficult to resist, can change their form at will and are strong. These fierce troops, the best of the monkeys, have their units of army force.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषड्विंशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the twenty sixth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
