6::43::1::Thereafter the gigantic army of Vanaras were fighting with exceedingly terrific Rakshasas and the anguished Rakshasas could not tolerate the sight.
6::43::2::Wishing victory for Ravana, the tiger among ogres, the Rakshasas of terrific deeds sallied forth accompanied by horses with golden trappings and seizing posts, which were like flames of fire shining like the sun's rays on the chariots and delightful shields, roaring resounding in all the ten directions.
6::43::3::Wishing triumph even the powerful army of powerful Vanaras of terrific deeds went ahead to fight with Rakshasas.
6::43::4::At that time the Vanaras and Rakshasas facing each other started a dual fight.
6::43::5::Indrajith, an exceedingly brilliant Rakshasa, contended with Angada, son of Vali just like Lord Siva with and haka, the Lord of death.
6::43::6::Sampathi , who is invariably difficult to encounter in war fought with Prajangha, and Hanuman started with Jambumali.
6::43::7::Highly furious Rakshasa, Vibheeshana, brother of Ravana fought with Rakshasa, Mitraghna.
6::43::8::Gaja of great strength fought with Rakshasa Tapa, and highly energetic Neela fought with Nikumbha.
6::43::9::Sugriva the Lord of Vanaras fought with Praghana and prosperous Lakshmana fought with Virupaksha.
6::43::10::Agnikethu, a Rakshasa who is difficult to win over, Rasmikethu, Suptaghna and Yajnakepu waged war with Rama.
6::43::11::Vajramushti with Mainda and Asaniprabhu with Dwivida, the chief of monkeys, fought with the two Rakshasas.
6::43::12::Heroic and dreadful Pratapana, who is indomitable in the battle, fought with Nala endowed with high speed.
6::43::13::Mighty Sushena, the righteous son fought with well known Vidyunmali. And fierce monkeys and Rakshasas fought in dual war with each other.
6::43::14::Fierce war which made hair stand on end happened there, with the heroic Rakshasas and Vanaras longing for victory.
6::43::15::In that war, the streams of blood that flowed from the bodies of Vanaras and Rakshasas were strewn like weeds in the form of hair, bearing logs of wood in the form of dead bodies.
6::43::16::Enraged, Indrajith struck Angada with his mace, the destroyer of hostile forces which was like Indra who had done a hundred sacrifices, would strike with his thunderbolt.
6::43::17::With the same mace (snatched from the Rakshasa) Angada swiftly struck Indrajit hand destroyed the horse, chariot, and charioteer.
6::43::18::While Prajangha injured Sampathi with three arrows, in turn Sampathi killed him with Aswakarna tree in the midst of war.
6::43::19::Jambumali of extraordinary might mounting on the chariot in the battle pierced Hanuman in his chest.
6::43::20::Hanuman the son of wind god, getting on to the chariot quickly destroyed that Rakshasa Jambumali with his palm.
6::43::21::Dreadful Pratapan roared and jumped over Nala. Nala in turn gouged out the eyes of Pratapan.
6::43::22::Sugriva, the Vanara leader, taking hold of Sapataparni tree hit Pratapan who had his mouth open as if to swallow the army and killed him.
6::43::23::Even Agnikethu who is difficult to attack, Rakshasas Rasmikethu, also Mitarghna and Yajakopa mangled Sri Rama with arrows.
6::43::24::Raged Rama with his sharp arrows which were like flames of fire destroyed all the four Rakshasas by cutting their heads.
6::43::25::Even Vajramushti fell on the ground struck with the fist by Mainda and the chariot and charioteer fell like the fort.
6::43::26::Just as the Sun 's rays pierced through clouds Nikumbha was shattered and fell like a mass of collyrium in the battlefield.
6::43::27::Nikumbha, the night ranger who was endowed with speed in shooting arrows again shot with a thousand arrows and laughed heartily.
6::43::28::Like Lord Vishnu, Nila took the wheels of the chariot of Nikumbha and shattered the charioteer into pieces.
6::43::29::Dwivida whose body was like a thunderbolt to feel, moved about on the mountain peak as Rakshasas were watching.
6::43::30::Asaniprabha shot arrows resembling lightning at Dwivida the Vanara Lord who was fighting with trees.
6::43::31::Dwivida whose limbs have been injured being enraged took Sala tree and killed Asaniprabha and the charioteer as well as the horses.
6::43::32::Vidyunmali mounting the chariot started releasing arrows covered with gold at Sushena and roared.
6::43::33::Nay, Sushena, the leader of Vanaras, saw himself down and Jambumali on top in the chariot. He crushed him with a big mountain peak.
6::43::34::Vidyunmali seeing Sushena, the monkey leader got a huge rock, and hit him on his chest with the mace.
6::43::35::Thereafter overtaken by anger, the monkey leader Sushena seized the huge rock from the Rakshasa and dropped it.
6::43::36::Then Vidyunmali, seeing the leader of monkeys getting the huge rock, hit him on the chest with the mace.
6::43::37::The great monkey leader Sushena, not caring for the mace, dropped the rock on Vidyunmali's chest.
6::43::38::Vidyunmali, the Rakshasa hit by the huge rock, was ceased of life.
6::43::39::In that manner the Rakshasa warriors and the Vanara warriors fought the duel wonderfully and like the way Devatas killed the Demons, the Rakshasas were killed.
6::43::40::The battlefield was dreadful and, frequented by jackals with spears, javelins, maces, and swords, strewn all over, similarly with broken chariots, horses, elephants, and monkeys fit for war. Broken wheels and axles of chariots were found all over.
6::43::41::It was like the war between Devatas and demons, with the trunks of the bodies of Vanaras and Rakshasas rubbing together lying scattered in all directions.
6::43::42::Then the Rakshasas killed by Vanara leaders, their bodies full of blood were looking for sunset and again picking up strength began to battle.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेत्रिचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the forty third sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
