6::20::1::Then the heroic Rakshasa called Shardula entered into the area encamped by the army under Sugriva's command and saw the sign flag of the army.
6::20::2::The evil minded raskshasa who was a spy of Ravana went back to Lanka speedily unruffled after having observed all over the camp and spoke these words to Ravana.
6::20::3::As if it is a second ocean deep and immeasurable, the ocean of Vanaras and Bears are heading towards Lanka (reported the spy).
6::20::4::Great sons of Dasaratha, Rama and Lakshmana, endowed with beautiful form and exceptional fortitude have come and set their foot on the seashore and settled to come to Sita.
6::20::5::Mighty king Ravana the army also is spread all over ten yojanas. I have seen going round the sky. You ought to know the real situation at once.
6::20::6::O king at once your spies should be deployed there and entrusted to have claims either by conciliation or creating differences.
6::20::7::Ravana the tiger among Rakshasas, after having heard Shardula's words decided within himself and said to Suka who is good at work praising him very much as usual.
6::20::8::Departing quickly, speak to the king Sugriva boldly without getting disturbed but in a gentle way and communicate this message.
6::20::9::O Sugriva, king of Vanaras You are born in a race of eminent kings, a mighty son of Rksharaja. Even a little harm has not been done to you by me. I am like your brother (Ravana's words to Sugriva to be communicated by Suka).
6::20::10::Sugriva What harm is done to you if I have brought the consort of prince? You are a wise one, go back to Kishkinda.
6::20::11::It is not possible for Vanaras to get here even for Gandharvas or Devas also. What to say of humans and Vanaras? (You may tell this to Sugriva).
6::20::12::Thus, commanded by the ruler of Rakshasas, Suka immediately transformed into a bird form and rose apace into the sky.
6::20::13::Suka having gone a long way in the sky to a distant place, stationed there spoke these words to Sugriva.
6::20::14::Thus, commanded by evil minded Ravana, Suka communicated everything as spoken by Ravana. At once the Vanaras rose and started to injure Suka with their fists.
6::20::15::At once the Vanaras violently seized the night ranger Suka and held him and threw him down to the ground from the sky.
6::20::16::Being attacked by Vanaras, Suka told these words. Oh Kakuthsa Rama messengers should not be killed. It will be good to prevent the Vanaras.
6::20::17::The envoy who puts aside the king's opinion and expresses his own opinion, which has not been said by the king ought to be killed.
6::20::18::After hearing the appeal of Suka and seeing the monkeys shouting, Rama spoke indicating not to kill him.
6::20::19::Suka, felt secure in the air and finding monkeys also settled, once again spoke these words.
6::20::20::Oh Sugriva Who is rich in spirit and endowed with mighty prowess What should I convey to Ravana who makes the world cry?
6::20::21::Suka having spoken in that way, Sugriva the leader of the monkeys who was not depressed in his spirit spoke these pleasant words to the Rakshasa spy.
6::20::22::O Rakshasa, you are the one who deserves death (Convey to Ravana this as my word). You are an enemy to my friend, like wise you are not worthy of sympathy, not my well wisher and also not dear to me. You are Rama's enemy, so like your relative Vali you are to be killed.
6::20::23::O Night ranger Ravana I shall kill all your sons, relatives, your kinsfolk. I shall come at once and even burn Lanka into ashes with my mighty prowess.
6::20::24::O Foolish Ravana Even if you go to a secret place, or rendered invisible by your interposition, or go into the orbit of the Sun, or go underground to Patala or go to the feet of Lord Siva for protection, you cannot escape from Rama. You along with your brother will be slain.
6::20::25::I do not see anyone who can save you in these three worlds, not Rakshasas, not devils or even Gandharvas.
6::20::26::When the aged and old vulture Jatayu restrained you, why did you disregard and seize broadeyed Sita? Why did you not take her away in the presence of Rama or even Lakshmana?
6::20::27::You do not understand that the foremost of Raghu's, a benevolent one, is difficult to overcome even for Indra. He will take away your life with his extraordinary might.
6::20::28::Then Angada, the noble one among Vanaras, the son of Vali, said, O King, to me it appears that he is not a messenger but a spy.
6::20::29::While standing here surely he has assessed the entire strength of the army. I hope he is taken as a captive and not returned to Lanka.
6::20::30::Then having been commanded by the king he caught the forlorn wailing Rakshasa Suka and bound him.
6::20::31::Thereafter Suka who was severely tormented by the Vanaras went towards benevolent Rama and wailed.
6::20::32::If my wings are cut off and my eyes are injured, on account of that inauspicious act you will take on all sins of my life from the night I was born till the night I am dead leaving my original form, even will happen (Suka tells Rama).
6::20::33::Having heard the lamentation, Rama said to the Vanaras Do not kill him. Set him free as he had come as an envoy.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेविंशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the twentieth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
