6::38::1::Rama, the well wisher of Lakshmana climbing up the Suvela mountain thought in his mind and thus spoke to Sugriva and the righteous, affectionate Vibheeshana, a counsellor, knower of right action and facts of Lanka, and a respectable enemy.
6::38::2::We shall all climb up this Suvela mountain captivating with hundreds of minerals and remain there tonight.
6::38::3::We shall see Lanka the abode of Rakshasa by whom, who is evil minded as he is to face death, has stolen my consort not knowing, who turned away from righteous duty not knowing the race with lowly Rakshasa mentality, who is immoral.
6::38::4::My wrath is aroused by the mention of the name of lowly Rakshasa. Because of his mistakes all Rakshasas are to be exterminated now.
6::38::5::Only one has done that sin and fallen into the noose of death. Because of one Rakshasa's mistake the race will perish.
6::38::6::Talking about Ravana in that manner, Rama climbed the captivating slopes of Suvela to rest there.
6::38::7::Heroic and alert Lakshmana also holding his great bow, followed. His ministers and Vibheeshana and Sugriva also followed him up.
6::38::8::Hanuman, Angada, Neela, Mainda, Dwivida, Gandhamadana, Panasa, Kumuda, Hara. Rambhu, Jambhavan, Sushena, intelligent Rshaba, highly energetic Durmukha and Satavali and similarly swift footed Vanaras, mountain rangers and those who can move at wind speed, all of them in hundreds ascended the Suvela mountain following Rama.
6::38::9::All of them in no time ascended the mountain peak and saw the city of Lanka which was as if clinging closely to the sky and hanging.
6::38::10::The vanara heroes witnessed beautiful gateways, captivating boundaries of auspicious Lanka filled all over with rakshasas.
6::38::11::The best of vanaras saw dark coloured rakshasas who stood like another boundary in a row.
6::38::12::All the vanaras saw the rakshasas eager for war, and as Rama stood looking at them many kinds of clamours were heard.
6::38::13::Thereafter the Sun had set in, and twilight reddened. Full moon started shining as night had set in.
6::38::14::Thereafter, Rama, the leader of Vanara troops happily rested on Suvela peak after Vibheeshana and Lakshmana duly offered their prayers.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेअष्टात्रिंशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the thirty eighth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
