6::127::1::After the fourteenth year of exile, on the fifth day of the bright half of lunar month Sri Rama and Lakshmana reached Bharadwaja's hermitage. They bent their heads down (as a mark of respect) and offered salutations.
6::127::2::Rama and Lakshmana having greeted sage Bharadwaja who had asceticism as his wealth, enquired, saying, Have you heard that crops have been good, Bharata is active, and mothers are doing well in Ayodhya?
6::127::3::When Rama had spoken that way to the great sage, Bharadwaja was delighted and with a smiling look replied.
6::127::4::Bharata is without attention to his body, wearing matted locks, placing your wooden sandals in front expecting you in the house. All is well at Ayodhya.
6::127::5::Rama! You, who are victorious in winning enemies, have earlier on account of father's words, intent on following father's words, accepting Kaikeyi's words, went with Lakshmana and Sita, clad in bark clothes, giving up kingdom and all possessions, like heaven set out on foot and entered huge forest, living on roots and fruits of the forest. Seeing you, compassion arose in me.
6::127::6::I am happy to see you coming to me, who have completed the task and won the enemies and after successful completion, you are meeting relatives and friends.
6::127::7::Raghava, while you were sojourning at Janasthana, you experienced joy and sorrow abundantly all that is known to me.
6::127::8::This irreproachable wife of yours was abducted by Ravana while you were engaged with the protection of all ascetics and entrusted with the care of brahmanas.
6::127::9::O, you are a lover of rightful duty, seeing Maricha, searching Sita, appearance of Kabhanda, your going to Pampa, making friendship with Sugriva, killing of Vali, searching for Vaidehi, finding of Sita by the son of wind god, and his action, setting fire to Lanka, finding of Nalasethu, construction of bridge, delighted Vanaras, destruction of sons, relatives and vehicles of Ravana's army, killing of Ravana who was a thorn in the eyes of god, coming of Brahma and gods, bestowing a boon and all that is known to me by the power of my penance. My disciples in Ayodhya communicated to me.
6::127::10::Jewel among the wielders of weapons! Now you take this water, and I shall bestow a boon to you. After taking my blessings you proceed to Ayodhya.
6::127::11::Glorious son of emperor obeying the words of Bharadwaja bending his head in reverence requested for that boon.
6::127::12::O divine sage! Let all the trees bear fruits out of season of several kinds of many sweet and juicy, tasting nectar appear on our way as we proceed to Ayodhya.
6::127::13::When Bharadwaja promised saying, 'Be it so' and the trees on all sides grew like heavenly trees.
6::127::14::Then while we were proceeding for three yojanas on all sides the trees that did not have fruits started bearing fruits, trees that did not have blossoms started having blossoms and the trees that dried up developed leaves and began to shed honey.
6::127::15::Then those bulls among Vanaras were delighted as though they were in heaven. Thrilled and very happy at the wonderful fruits, they enjoyed them as they liked as per their desire and felt joyful.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेसप्तविंशत्युत्तरशततमस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of one hundred and twenty seventh sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
