6::91::1::The nightranger, effulgent Indrajith standing on the ground very angry, with horses lost, was flaming with energy.
6::91::2::Exceedingly wanting to kill one another, wielding bows, both sallied forth like Lordly elephants in the forest, to succeed.
6::91::3::Moving all over, both Rakshasas and Vanaras killing one another in the battle did not leave their master.
6::91::4::Then Ravana's son, praising all the Rakshasas making them happy, spoke these words.
6::91::5:: As all directions are spread with darkness now it is not possible to know who one's own is or others at this time.
6::91::6::You delude the sight of Vanaras in battle. I will come to the battle taking the chariot.
6::91::7::While I enter the city you must see that these wicked minded Vanaras do not prevent me from going.
6::91::8::Ravana's son, a slayer of his enemies, having spoken to Vanaras in that way, in deceiving manner entered Lanka to get the chariot.
6::91::9::Ravana's son ascended a decorated chariot yoked to horses, directed by a charioteer who could tender good advice and a knower of the nature of horses. It was a beautiful chariot decked with darts and swords adorned with gold which Ravana's son of extraordinarily bright, who has won enemies, ascended.
6::91::10::Heroic son of Mandodari, impelled by the force of destiny, departed from the city surrounded by Rakshasas.
6::91::11::Heroic in the act of destruction of enemies, Indarjith having started from the city in his chariot drawn by swift horses assailed Vibheeshana and Lakshmana.
6::91::12::Seeing Indrajith seated in the chariot, great hero Lakshmana as well as the Vanaras and Vibheeshana wondered how easily he went and returned.
6::91::13::Indrajith, highly enraged, struck Vanara leaders with a volley of hundreds and thousands of arrows.
6::91::14::Indrajith, a winner of combat, became highly furious and stretched his bow showing his skill easily struck at Vanaras.
6::91::15::(The Vanaras), though endowed with prowess and of terrific courage, struck by the Rakshasa, they sought refuge of Lakshmana, their Lord, just as people seek the refuge of their Lord, the creator.
6::91::16::There, in the battlefield the delight of Raghus glowing with anger shattered the Rakshasas showing the skill of his hand s.
6::91::17::Indrajith seizing another bow hastily targeted at Lakshmana and Lakshmana split them with three arrows.
6::91::18::Then Saumithri pierced with five arrows into the chest of Indrajith like a venomous serpent and split the bow.
6::91::19::Those arrows released from the great bow of Lakshmana, entered the body of Indrajithand fell on the ground like a huge red serpent.
6::91::20::Bow split, ejecting blood from mouth, Indrajith took his strong best of bows which had a stout string.
6::91::21::Indrajith, aiming at Lakshmana, let loose rain of arrows easily like rain.
6::91::22::Lakshmana, the tamer of enemies, without reacting intercepted the shower of arrows released by Indrajith which was difficult to resist.
6::91::23::Highly energetic Lakshmana, a delight of Raghus, unperturbed, demonstrated to Indrajith, which was a wonder indeed.
6::91::24::Then extremely angry Lakshmana pierced all the Rakshasas quickly, each one with three arrows and struck them and even the son of Rakshasa king, exhibiting his skills.
6::91::25::Indrajith, who was grievously wounded by his hostile enemy, Lakshmana, the destroyer of hostile enemies, continuously discharged arrows at him.
6::91::26::Heroic enemy, the righteous Lakshmana, tore the head of the carwarrior as well as the charioteer in the battle with bhala (spear), even before Indrajith discharged pointed arrows at him.
6::91::27::There, though there was no charioteer, the horses went round in circles and as they went forward it was wonderful.
6::91::28::Saumithri of untiring valour, overcome with fury in the battle, struck the horses to scare them and destroyed them.
6::91::29::Indrajith, unable to tolerate the action of Saumithri, was angry and struck him with ten arrows.
6::91::30::His arrows, which resembled thunderbolts and were like venomous serpents, touching Lakshmana's shield shining like gold, broken, and fallen
6::91::31::Ravana's son, knowing that it is not possible to break the shield of Lakshmana, quickly showed his weapon with three arrows with plumes and gems and struck him on the forehead.
6::91::32::Lakshmana, the delight of Raghus, who loved to fight, looked charming in the battlefield with three arrows stuck on his forehead looking like three mountain peaks.
6::91::33::Then in the battle, pierced by Rakshasa in that manner, Laksmana immediately stretched his bow and struck with five arrows on the face of Indrajith, who was adorned with auspicious earrings.
6::91::34::Both heroes of extraordinary might and equipped with huge arms, endowed with terrific valour, Lakshmana and Indrajith struck one another with sharp arrows.
6::91::35::Then smeared with blood the two, Lakshmana and Indrajit, shone like fully blossomed Kimsuka in battle.
6::91::36::Both wishing for victory, set to tear each other, pierced dreadful arrows on one another all over the limbs, opposing.
6::91::37::Then Ravana's son in his charming countenance, filled with wrath because of conflict, struck at Vibheeshana with three arrows.
6::91::38::Having struck Vibheeshana with three arrows, he struck again all the Vanara leaders with one arrow each.
6::91::39::Brilliant Vibheeshana struck evil minded Indrajith, his horses and elephants with his mace.
6::91::40::Highly energetic Indrajith, leaping down from the chariot, horses destroyed, now hurled a javelin at his uncle in the chariot.
6::91::41::Observing the javelin coming towards him, Lakshmana, the delight of Raghus and enhancer of Sumithra's joy, split it into ten pieces, which had fallen on the ground.
6::91::42::Vibheeshana of strong body, pierced five arrows like thunderbolt in impact into the chest of Indrajith.
6::91::43::The arrows with red feathers of Vibheeshana having penetrated the body of Indrajith, piercing into the body they became red coloured seemed like a red serpent.
6::91::44::Indrajith, angry with his uncle, staying in the midst of Rakshasas, seized a mighty strong best arrow gifted by Yama.
6::91::45::Extraordinarily brilliant and of terrific valour, Lakshmana, perceiving the mighty shaft yoked by him (by Indrajith), he took up another arrow.
6::91::46::That arrow was gifted to Lakshmana in dream by Kubera, the god of wealth and even Suras or Asuras cannot resist it and is difficult to win.
6::91::47::Excellent bows of the two made noise like Krauncha birds while being drawn with great strength by the two, whose arms resembled iron bars.
6::91::48::The two best bows of both the heroes together, being powerful, shone with splendour when drawn with bowstring.
6::91::49::Those arrows released from the bows lit the sky when their heads collided with each other and glowed by rubbing against each other.
6::91::50::By the impact of the two arrows brought together, a formidable form of fire frightening with smoke and sparks was created.
6::91::51::In the battle both of them touching each other in conflict like the major planets flew into a hundred pieces and fell on earth.
6::91::52::Then both Lakshmana and Indrajith in the face of the battle seeing their arrows in nought with each other were abashed and got agitated.
6::91::53::Enraged Saumithri, seizing the weapon of Varuna, skilled in warfare loosened on Indrajith (Mahendra's enemy), which was presided over by Rudra.
6::91::54::Then the very wonderful weapon of Varuna was made ineffective by the highly energetic Indrajith's who used glowing fire missiles as if to destroy the whole world.
6::91::55::Then Lakshmana used a Sun missile and repelled (Indrajith's fire missile). Seeing his missile obstructed, Indrajith deluded with anger used a sharp Asura missile capable of destroying the enemy.
6::91::56::By the Sun missile, the Kutamudgaras, tridents, Bhusundas, swords and axes issued forth from Indrajith's bow.
6::91::57::Effulgent Lakshmana, seeing the terrible Asura missile and deliberating that it is capable of destroying all human beings and difficult to repel, used a Maheswara missile to divert.
6::91::58::The war between both was wonderful and horripulating. Beings from the sky saw Lakshmana diverting the Asura missile.
6::91::59::As the frightful war between Vanaras and Rakshasas went on, many beings surrounded in the sky were astonished and looked charming.
6::91::60::The Rsis, Devatas, manes, Gandharvas, Garudas, serpents and Indra who had performed hundred sacrifices, protected Lakshmana in war.
6::91::61::And thereafter, Raghava's brother fitted another excellent arrow which had the impact of the touch of fire capable of tearing Indrajith.
6::91::62::The arrow with lovely feathers, consisting of beautiful parts, skilfully done, well jointed, decked with gold, was not only difficult to put off but also difficult to bear, was capable of destroying enemies, frightful, resembling venomous serpents, and worshipped by gods.
6::91::63::In the past at the war between Devas and Asuras, a mighty and energetic valiant Lord of Devas who had green horses conquered Danavas (with the same sword).
6::91::64::Son of Saumithri, that prosperous Lakshmana, drawing Indra's missile, the foremost one, and also the best of arrows, which has never been defeated, spoke these words set to achieve the purpose.
6::91::65::If Dasharatha's son, Sri Rama is righteous, truthful, of unrivalled valour and true to his promise this arrow will kill Indrajith.
6::91::66::Having spoken that way, Lakshmana, heroic in battle, bending the bow, stretching the arrow till the ear released on Indrajith.
6::91::67::Prosperous Lakshmana, the destroyer of enemies, aiming at Indrajith's head shining with earrings belonging to the head severed from the body, it fell on ground.
6::91::68::Trunk broken off, the huge head of Indrajith bathed in blood was seen on the earth shining like gold.
6::91::69::Thereafter Indrajith with his shield, and helmet of the head broken was thrown on earth killed.
6::91::70::Then Vibheeshana and all the Vanaras rejoiced just as Devas, when Vrtasura was killed.
6::91::71::Then shouts of victory aroused from the heavens from the created beings of heaven, Rsis also, Gandharvas and Apsaras.
6::91::72::Great army of Rakshasas even though desired to win seeing (Indrajith dead), Vanaras started attacking them. Unable to bear Rakshasas screamed.
6::91::73::Those Rakshasas being killed by Vanaras, went running to Lanka leaving their weapons, with senses lost.
6::91::74::All Rakshasas feared and panic stricken fled in hundreds, in groups in all directions leaving their sharpedged spears, swords, and axes.
6::91::75::Pained by Vanaras, some fearful entered Lanka, few had fallen in the ocean and some sought refuge in the mountain.
6::91::76::Indrajith was lying, having fallen on the ground, and not even one of the thousands of Rakshasas was present there to see.
6::91::77::Just as Sun rays go away as soon as the Sun sets in the evening, the Rakshasas also went in all directions seeing Indrajith fallen.
6::91::78::Shorn of life, the broad shouldered Indrajith remained on the ground like the Sun whose rays have become cool, after death.
6::91::79::Then many were at peace and rejoiced in the world, being relieved, when Ravana's son dropped dead.
6::91::80::Glorious Rakshasa of sinful deeds having been killed, all including great sages and Indra felt rejoiced.
6::91::81::In heaven also, sounds of drums of Gandharvas, great souls and dance of Apsaras were heard.
6::91::82::With cruel minded Rakshasa killed, celebrities showered rain of flowers praising the wonderful deed.
6::91::83::As the terror of all worlds had fallen and the water from the sky became pure, Devas and Danavas rejoiced and came there.
6::91::84::Devas, Danavas and Ghandharvas arrived there and said, Let the Brahmins be without anxiety and move about without fear.
6::91::85::When, the best of Rakshasa, a leader of extraordinary prowess was killed, the Vanara army seeing Lakshmana felt happy and greeted him.
6::91::86::Vibheeshana and Hanuman, leader of Bears Jambavan praised Lakshmana and greeted him for his victory.
6::91::87::Having accomplished their goal, monkeys roaring, playing, surrounded Lakshmana, and stood.
6::91::88::Then Vanaras wagging their tails and lashing them announced slogans saying, Lakshmana is winning.
6::91::89::The monkeys feeling very happy embraced one another singing in praise of Lakshmana saying Lakshmana has wonand stories related to Lakshmana
6::91::90::Knowing that Indra's enemy has been killed by Lakshmana, the Devatas experienced joy that their loving friend has done a deed which cannot be done by others. Witnessing the battle, they felt very happy, their minds filled with joy.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकावेयुद्धकाण्डेएकनवतितमस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the ninety first sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
