6::11::1::Infatuated with passion towards Mythili, disregarded by his dear ones on account of sinful actions, sinner Ravana became weak.
6::11::2::Because of the lapse of time, Ravana considered it imminent to consult with his ministers and friends about war.
6::11::3::Ravana, having reached, ascended the magnificent chariot that was overlaid with golden latticework, decked with gems and corals, and yoked to trained horses.
6::11::4::The tenheaded Ravana, eminent one among Rakshasas climbed up that best of chariots that was making noise like the roaring sound of a huge cloud and went to assembly.
6::11::5::Then soldiers wielding swords and different kinds of weapons stood in front of the Lord of Rakshasas.
6::11::6::Further (Rakshasas) adorned in different kinds of uncouth attire, wearing different kinds of ornaments went by his side and also at the back.
6::11::7::(Some Rakshasa) Charioteers riding on chariots, some on proud elephants and some on horses sporting away followed the tenheaded Ravana.
6::11::8::Some holding maces and iron bars, some holding strong iron clubs in hand, and some others holding battle axes, tridents and other weapons went.
6::11::9::Then as Ravana entered the assembly thousands of band instruments sounded aloud. Conchs broke forth producing tumultuous noise.
6::11::10::As the rattling sounds of the great chariot echoed in all directions, he entered the bright pleasing royal path all at once.
6::11::11::The pure white canopy of Ravana held by the Rakshasas spread like lines shone like the Lord of stars (the full moon).
6::11::12::A pair of fans with pure crystal like handles with a golden bouquet in the middle glowed.
6::11::13::Standing on the ground, all the Rakshasas bowing their heads down and with folded palms offered their salutations to the foremost of the Rakshasas seated in the chariot.
6::11::14::Then as the conqueror of foes, an exceptionally splendid one, Ravana was praised by the Rakshasas saying, Victory to you, Prosperity to you, Ravana entered the wellbuilt royal court.
6::11::15::Exceptionally splendid one, (Ravana) embodied with glowing body entered the royal court constructed by Vishwakarma, with pillars of gold and silver. Inside of the court was pure like crystal and carpeted with shining golden silk. It was very beautiful and ever shining and guarded by six hundred devils.
6::11::16::Ravana sat on a huge excellent seat encrusted with Vydurya gems and covered with deer skin and which had a pillow.
6::11::17::Then that Lord like Ravana said We have to do a great task against the enemies now. It has to be performed. He commanded quick footed messengers to get the Rakshasas to him at once.
6::11::18::Those Rakshasas having heard the words spoken by Ravana went to places of recreation, bedrooms and gardens and went round without fear into every house directing the Rakshasas.
6::11::19::Of those (Rakshasas) some went on exquisite chariots, some on proud sturdy horses some ascended elephants and some by foot.
6::11::20::With chariots, elephants and horses advancing in groups the prosperous capital was shining resembling the flocks of birds in the sky.
6::11::21::Parking those vehicles of several kinds at the entrance they entered the royal court by foot like the lions entering the cave of a mountain.
6::11::22::They held the feet of the king and on offering salutations to the king took their seat. While some took golden seats, some sat on a kusa grass mat, and some took a se at on the floor.
6::11::23::Those Rakshasas (who arrived) at the royal court settled down in appropriate seats on the king's command. The leaders of Rakshasas s at close by Ravana.
6::11::24::Those who were learned in decision making, ministers, virtuous and knowledgeable ones, those who can visualise things with their intellect, army men, like wise many heroes and important people collected at the royal assembly shining in golden colour to deliberate on matters for a happy conclusion.
6::11::25::Thereafter illustrious and great Vibheeshana having ascended auspicious and choicest chariot decked with gold and yoked to good horses went to the assembly of his elder brother.
6::11::26::There after Vibheeshana the younger brother, repeated his name (by way of courtesy ). A fter that he offered salutations to his elder brother's feet. B oth Sukha and Prahastha likewise followed Vibheeshana and took their seats offered according to their position.
6::11::27::In that royal court decorated with different kinds of golden and gem colours, the Rakshasas attired in beautiful clothes with their body smeared with fragrance of incense and sandal paste and wearing floral garland s whose fragrance had spread all over.
6::11::28::Those who assembled at the royal court neither made a little noise, nor uttered untruth, nor spoke. All of them were fully accomplished, very heroic and looked at their Lord's face.
6::11::29::In that assembly, amid those heroes of great prowess, who held arms, Ravana glowed like Indra, who wields a diamond bolt in battle among the Vasus.।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकादशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the eleventh sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
