6::35::1::The mighty armed Rama, the conqueror of enemy cities, Raghava marched forth with the noise of the blowing of conches and the sounds of drums.
6::35::2::Ravana, the Lord of Rakshasas, looked at his ministers on hearing the sounds and reflecting for a moment.
6::35::3::Thereafter the mighty Lord of Rakshasas, a cruel one, a scourge of the world addressed the assembly of his ministers and spoke abusing them.
6::35::4::You have told me about the valour of Hanuman the messenger of Rama and his prowess in crossing the ocean which I heard just now.
6::35::5::Even though you are truly valorous in war, on knowing Rama's prowess, you are standing mute looking at each other. I know that.
6::35::6::Then, Malyavan the maternal grandfather of Ravana, a very wise Rakshasa indeed said this on hearing Ravana's statement.
6::35::7::O king! Whoever is well versed in all the fourteen sciences and is a follower of justice, he alone wins over enemies and rules the kingdom for long.
6::35::8::Continuing to act in that way in course of time a king who encounters his enemies and expands his own side, enjoys great sovereignty.
6::35::9::When a king is losing strength, he should join hand s with the enemy who is equal to him. He should not disrespect the enemy but quit his hostility and join him (if the enemy is more powerful).
6::35::10::O Ravana! Joining with that Rama is agreeable to me. Let that Sita for whose sake you have been attacked be restored to him.
6::35::11::All the celestial sages and Gandharvas are wishing him victory. Therefore, do not have enmity. Making an alliance with him is desirable for you.
6::35::12::The divine Brahma, the grandfather of the universe created two orders, deities and devils. They took the refuge of virtues and vices respectively.
6::35::13::The great souls were towards righteousness and Rakshasas took the side of unrighteousness.
6::35::14::When moral merit destroys unrighteousness, it is called Krtayuga. So also, when virtue gets eclipsed by unrighteousness, it is called Kaliyuga.
6::35::15::While you were ranging in all the worlds, you gave up righteousness and embraced unrighteousness. Therefore, the enemy who is righteous is stronger than you.
6::35::16::You are nourishing unrighteousness mistakenly. Therefore, it is going to swallow us. It has become the cause for the divine celestial side to become powerful.
6::35::17::Being engaged in matters of sense pleasures you have created great agitation(disturbance) in the minds of the seers (engaged in penance) who resemble gods of burning fire.
6::35::18::Their power is difficult to overcome as they are pure souls and blazing like fire by their austerity. They follow virtues faithfully intending to acquire merit like brahmanas. They are standing firmly curbing their senses doing sacrifices offering oblations into sacrificial fires following tradition. Having subdued the Rakshasas, they are continuing to recite Vedas and on hearing Vedas the Rakshasas are running away in different directions like the rain cloud is scattered in the hot season.
6::35::19::By the spread of smoke in different directions from the sacrificial fires from the oblations offered by the seers the brilliance of the Rakshasas is taken away.
6::35::20::The intense austerities performed by the sages in different regions determined firmly are tormenting the Rakshasas.
6::35::21::You have secured boons of immunity against death at the hand s of strong and mighty and powerful valour, like gods, Danavas, Yakshas and human beings. The Vanaras, Bears and monkeys with dark faces are coming here now thundering.
6::35::22::Beholding different dreadful ones rising up in various directions, I foresee destruction of all Rakshasas.
6::35::23::Formidable clouds are emitting hot and most frightening thunder drenched by rain of blood all over Lanka.
6::35::24::With tear drops falling from the eyes of weeping horses and elephants (carrying army) they are discoloured by dust and are not shining like before.
6::35::25::Wicked jackals and vultures are entering deep into Lanka and gathering. They are crying most frightfully.
6::35::26::Women of dark colour like coal with yellow teeth are speaking unpleasant things standing before us in dreams laughing heartily.
6::35::27::In the houses, food offerings made for gods are eaten by dogs, donkeys are procreating cows and rats of mongoose.
6::35::28::Cats are having the company of (mating) Leopards, pigs are mating with dogs, Kinneras with Rakshasas as well as human beings also.
6::35::29::The white and redfooted doves are moving about impelled by time spirit boding destruction of Rakshasas.
6::35::30::Minas living in households grappling with bellicose birds in delight are falling down dead.
6::35::31::All birds and animals are making hostile noise. Time is always coming in a dreadful and monstrous blackish form with a shaved head, morning, and evening. Considering all these sinister portents are making an appearance at all households.
6::35::32::Rama is Lord Vishnu in human form endowed with fortitude and prowess. One who has constructed an amazing bridge on the ocean is not just a human being. O Ravana! Align with the ruler of men, Sri Rama. After careful thinking and determining correctly, do what is good.
6::35::33::Best among men and foremost of counsellors, mighty Malyavan beholding Ravana, the Lord of Rakshasas and keenly observing his mind (that Ravana is not liking the counsel) remained silent.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेपञ्चत्रिंशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the thirty fifth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
