6::29::1::There after Ravana having heard the words spoken by Suka about the army of Vanara heroes, seeing Lakshmana of extraordinary valour, the right shoulder of Rama standing close by Rama his own brother Vibheeshana close by  the king of Vanaras, Sugriva of fierce valour and Angada the son of Vali (the son of Indra who wields thunderbolt)  and valiant Hanuman Jambavan who is difficult to conquer Sushena, Nila, Kumuda, bull among the leaping animals Nala likewise Gaja, Gavaksha, Sarabha, Mainda and Dwivida got a little broken hearted and mixed with fury started to rebuke both the heroes Suka and Saarana.
6::29::2::(That Ravana) with his throat choked with anger spoke indignantly and harshly to both Suka and Saarana who stood with their heads bent down in supplication.
6::29::3::It is not proper for those ministers dependent on a capable ruler who has the power to check and hold forth, to speak that which is unpleasant.
6::29::4::Is it appropriate for both of you to praise the enemy this way before war?
6::29::5::You have not grasped that which is the essence of political wisdom in the sastras in spite of waiting upon elders, teachers and parents which was in vain.
6::29::6::Even if you have grasped you have not understood the meaning or out of intensity of your ignorance. Or else I am bearing foolish ones like you who are not fit to be ministers. Out of good luck I am ruling this sovereignty.
6::29::7::Did you not have fear of death when you spoke such harsh words to me, who can by mere order make good or evil to you?
6::29::8::Trees may remain unscathed even on touching forest fire, but those who are punishable do not remain unpunished on account of the king and are treated harshly.
6::29::9::I would have slayed these two sinners who praise the enemy side, if my anger had not softened and remembered their earlier services.
6::29::10::You get away from here, disappear from here. On the contrary since I remember your earlier actions performed by you, I do not wish to kill you. Indeed, both of you are devoid of love and are ungrateful. You stand killed (already).
6::29::11::Ravana, having spoken that way, both Suka and Saarana felt shy and withdrew from speaking words of praise of Ravana saying, 'Let you be victorious'.
6::29::12::Ravana, the tenheaded one, then said to Mahodara who was standing nearby swiftly bring spies who are experts in policy to me.
6::29::13::(Ravana) Having said so, Mahodara ordered the spies to approach the king quickly. On reaching they greeted the king with folded hand s promoting h i m to' be victorious' and stood.
6::29::14::There upon the Lord of Rakshasas, spoke these words to those spies who are dependable ones, warriors devoid of fear of enemies.
6::29::15::From here you go and reach there you may observe perceptions of Rama and of others close to him, his ministers and those who have reached there in affection to him.
6::29::16::You may see how he goes to sleep, how he wakes up etc., what he does, everything. You may come after knowing everything.
6::29::17::Wise kings of the land, having known about enemies from the spies destroy enemies in war with little effort.
6::29::18::The spies then gladly uttered the words 'be it so', went round the king in reverence and departed with Saardula leading in front.
6::29::19::Then the spies circumambulated the great Rakshasa king and having done so went to the place where Rama and Lakshmana were stationed.
6::29::20::Reaching the Suvela mountain in disguise, they saw Rama and Lakshmana along with Sugriva and Vibheeshana.
6::29::21::Those Rakshasas were bewildered with fear on looking at the army. Righteous Vibheeshana recognized them on seeing them.
6::29::22::By chance Vibheeshana seized Saardula, the evil Rakshasa who was moving in that army.
6::29::23::As the monkeys attempted to kill him (Saardula), compassionate Rama released him and also the other Rakshasas.
6::29::24::Harassed by the valorous and swift Vanaras, those Rakshasas lost their senses and returned to Lanka gasping and panting.
6::29::25::Then those night ranger spies, who are ever wandering outside, coming near, the ten headed Ravana, narrated about the great force (Vanara army), of fierce strength, residing near the mountain Suvela.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकोनत्रिंशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the twenty ninth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
