6::33::1::Then seeing Sita in distraught, a Rakshasi by name Saarana who was very dear and friendly with Vaidehi approached her.
6::33::2::Then Saarana of sweet expression, comforted Sita who was put off and was extremely sorrowful because of the Rakshasa king.
6::33::3::Most compassionate Saarana, determined to protect was friendly with Sita while she was ordered for protecting her by Ravana.
6::33::4::Saarana saw her friend Sita, who had lost consciousness, fully covered by dust by rolling on the dirty ground like a female horse.
6::33::5::Saarana consoled Vaidehi of noble vows in a friendly way and encouraged her to recover saying, Let there be no pain at heart.
6::33::6::O Broadeyed friend! You are constantly under fear (timid). Give up fear of Ravana, I have overheard all that you have spoken to Ravana and his reply by hiding in a secret place out of my affection, without caring for my life.
6::33::7::O Mythili! I know all about why the king of Rakshasas returned back agitated.
6::33::8::Rama is a knower of his Self. It is not possible to kill him while he is asleep. Nay death is not possible for he is a tiger among men.
6::33::9::Vanaras are fighting with trees and are not capable of being killed. Just as the gods are protected by their Lord Indra, Vanaras are protected by Rama. It is not feasible to kill them.
6::33::10::O Sita! One who is endowed with long rounded arms and broad chest, a valorous one, a glorious wielder of bow and powerful Rama along with his brother Lakshmana, is always a protector of himself and all surrounding him. He is a knower of sastras of propriety. Raghava is majestic with inconceivable courage and a destroyer of foes. He will not be killed.
6::33::11::On account of his perverse thought and being inimical to all beings Ravana a tricker has attempted a trick at you in anger.
6::33::12::Your sorrow has gone. All auspiciousness awaits you. Surely you will attain good fortune (Lakshmi). You listen to my happy and pleasant news.
6::33::13::Rama accompanied by Vanara army has crossed the ocean and reached the southern shore of the ocean.
6::33::14::Rama, a fully accomplished soul accompanied by Lakshmana together with army stands protected by the army and is stationed on the seashore.
6::33::15::These swift footed Rakshasas sent by the king brought the news of Rama crossing the sea.
6::33::16::O Broadeyed Sita! On hearing the news (of Rama crossing) Rakshasa king is holding consultation with ministers about what to do.
6::33::17::While Saarana was speaking to Sita, frightening sounds of the army making all kinds of attempts were heard.
6::33::18::On hearing the loud sounds of army maces, rods, and drums, Saarana looked at Sita and spoke these sweet words.
6::33::19::O Timid Sita! Listen to the deep penetrating sounds of drums like the rumbling of rain clouds signifying the preparations of the army.
6::33::20::Elephants in rut are being decorated, charioteers are getting ready for war in thousands and discharging darts from hands and laughing loudly.
6::33::21::See the weird appearance of footsoldiers collected here and therein groups prepared to go. The royal path is filled with choking sounds of the troops moving fast, like an ocean filled with streams of water. It is strange.
6::33::22::Look at the sheen of weapons, the leather shields, spreading forth different pleasing colours, the brightness of which resembles the burning of forest fire arisen and spread in summer. And here are chariots, horses and elephants decked with ornaments following Ravana, as well as the powerful Rakshasa army full of joy.
6::33::23::Listen to the bustle of noise of the Rakshasas lifting the weapons, ringing of the bells (of elephants), and rattling of chariots, and neighing of horses. Listen to the flourish of the trumpets. The happy Rakshasas are making tumultuous noise causing horripilation.
6::33::24::Your fire of anger will be gone. Your husband, the lotuspetal eyed Rama whose prowess is inconceivable like that of Indra who vanquished Daityas will come and kill Ravana and win you back.
6::33::25::Your husband accompanied by Lakshmana will exhibit his valour against Rakshasas just as Indra did against enemies accompanied by Vishnu (descended as his younger brother).
6::33::26::When the enemy is killed, and your objective is accomplished, I shall behold you mounted on the lap of Rama.
6::33::27::Virtuous Sita! Hugged by your broad chested Rama, you will shed tears of joy on his bosom.
6::33::28::O Sita! God like lady! Mighty Rama will soon release your single plait hanging up to hind part for many months before.
6::33::29::God like Lady! Beholding the face of Sri Rama whose face is like a just risen full moon, you will cast off tears of sorrow just as a female snake sets its slough free.
6::33::30::O divine Mythili! Killing Ravana in war before long, your beloved who deserves to be happy will be happy in the company of his beloved.
6::33::31::Just as the earth becomes green with crops blessed with good monsoon, so also you will become joyful by seeing the great soul Rama's heroism.
6::33::32::Seek refuge of the Sun God who while coursing round the great mountain goes round in circles around the orb swiftly like a horse. He is the source of joy and sorrow for all beings.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेत्रयस्त्रिंशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the thirty third sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
