6::78::1::On hearing that Nikumbha and Kumbha had been killed, Ravana was very furious and burning in anger.
6::78::2::The Rakshasa king was overtaken by both anger and sorrow, bewildered excessively sent for broadeyed Makara, the son of Khara.
6::78::3::Son! commanded by me, you go accompanied by arm and kill the Vanaras, Raghava and Lakshmana aslo,
6::78::4::Rejoicing to hear the words of Ravana, proclaiming himself to be a hero, Maka raksha, the son of Khara said 'good'.
6::78::5::Greeting the tenheaded Rakshasa and going round him according to tradition, the mighty warrior went out from the abode early morning by the command of Ravana.
6::78::6::Khara's son spoke to the commanderinchief of the army standing nearby 'Let the chariot be brought quickly and the army proceed'.
6::78::7::Upon hearing those words, the commanderinchief of the Rakshasas responded and placed the army near him.
6::78::8::After having gone round the chariot he (Makara) ascended and said to the charioteer, 'let the chariot be driven quickly'.
6::78::9::Thereafter, Maka raksha spoke to all Rakshasas, 'All of you be ahead of me and fight violently'.
6::78::10::I will kill both Rama and Lakshmana in the battle, by the order of Ravana, the king of Rakshasas.
6::78::11::Now I shall put an end to Rama and Lakshmana, Sugriva and the Vanaras with the best of arrows.
6::78::12::Going there now, I will terminate the great Vanara army with these pikes just as drywood is burnt by fire.
6::78::13::On hearing Maka raksha's words all the mighty Rakshasas came with different kinds of weapons.
6::78::14::Those who could change their form at will, cruel, with protruding teeth, yellow eyes, dishevelled hair, of frightful appearance, huge like elephants surrounding the son of Khara went joyously forward shaking the earth.
6::78::15::There was a beating of drums, blowing of thousands of conchs, clapping of arms and great sound was heard.
6::78::16::There, the long whip dropped from the charioteer's hand and the Rakshasa's standard had fallen suddenly by divine will.
6::78::17::His horses yoked to the chariot went giving up their valour, faltering feet, desperate and shedding tears.
6::78::18::At the departure of evil minded and angry Maka raksha, dreadful and violent wind blew carrying with crumbling dust.
6::78::19::Seeing those portents incidentally and not taking into account those Rakshasas went where Rama and Lakshmana were.
6::78::20::Those night rangers who resembled elephants, clouds, and buffaloes in colour, who were skilled in warfare, wounded by maces and swords, moved to and from saying I shall fight,।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेअष्टसप्ततितमस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the seventyeighth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
