6::40::1::Rama accompanied by Vanara troop and Sugriva, ascended the peak of Suvela mountain spread over yojanas.
6::40::2::Remaining there for a short while, Rama observed the view of Lanka in all directions. He saw Lanka built on the charming peak of Trikuta strongly by Vishwakarma, endowed with delightful groves.
6::40::3::From there Rama saw on the peak of the tower the Rakshasa king, who is difficult to approach. He was fanned by white whisks on both sides, graced with triumphal parasol, decorated his body with red sandal paste, adorned in redcoloured ornaments, resembling dark clouds, attired in red like the hare's blood, embroidered with golden thread, with scars on his chest caused by indentations made by the tusks of Airavata the elephant of Indra, looked like a mass of cloud covered by sunshine at dusk.
6::40::4::Looking at the sight of Raghava seeing Rakshasa king, Sugriva the king of Vanaras got up instantly rashly.
6::40::5::Provoked by anger, courageous and strong Sugriva rose up impelled by impetuosity and flew to the peak of the tower.
6::40::6::For a moment he stood looking at the ogre fearlessly in his mind and treating him like straw spoke harsh words.
6::40::7::O Rakshasa! I am a friend and servant of the king of kings, ruler of the world. By his power I will not leave you!, Sugriva said.
6::40::8::Having spoken thus, Sugriva got up speedily and flew to the top of the tower (here Ravana was located) held the diadem and pushed it on the ground.
6::40::9::Observing Sugriva coming towards him, Ravana said, When you were not seen by me you had a neck. I will make you neckless.
6::40::10::Telling like that that Ravana got up and threw Sugriva by his hand s to the ground. Then Sugriva getting up like a ball fallen pushed Ravana down.
6::40::11::Sugriva and Ravana, their bodies sweating all over, bodies coloured red with blood looking like red silk cotton trees, their bodies clinging together interlocked with each other stood motionless. They were fighting with their fists, palms and blows of forearms, hurting each other with nails and carrying out unbearable forms of war.
6::40::12::Violently fighting like that aggressively for long, throwing each other down repeatedly, bending and moving their feet in a direction, stood on the fl at area of the peak in the middle portion.
6::40::13::Squeezing their bodies of each other they dropped down between the boundary of the peak and the moat. They were gasping heavily for a moment and clung their body to each other jumping.
6::40::14::Both pressing their bosom to each other, clung to each other, and fastened themselves in embrace in the comb at having received similar training in war and both endowed with might. At this time, they went on in comb at using several war methods.
6::40::15::Both of them resembled a tiger and lion affected by pride, connecting to each other through their shoulders like Lordly elephants, hitting and hurting one another holding one another fell down at once simultaneously.
6::40::16::Both of them were holding one another, snubbing each other gradually following many kinds of combat. As both the heroes were well trained in wrestling and fighting, they did not feel tiresome.
6::40::17::Both Ravana and Sugriva endowed with mighty arms, were resisting each other, and keeping away one another engaging in comb at for a long time. They kept on moving, going around each other swiftly.
6::40::18::Both of them intent on destroying each other were approaching one another and now and then growling like cats for the sake of food.
6::40::19::Both Vanara king and Ravana being learned in war craft, went around in circles like ox's urine, stood in different wonderful postures, moved forward and backward horizontally and obliquely to evade movements, hitting, and delivering each other, standing steadily motionless, striking, jumping, assaulting each other coming forward and going away, going backwards jumping from behind, holding hands and folding to resist exhibiting their skill in combat.
6::40::20::In the meantime, Ravana thought of exhibiting his superiority by jugglery and jumped to the sky. Knowing that Sugriva, the untiring Vanara king assumed the air of victor and rose up to the sky. Baffled Ravana stood thinking Sugriva would come there.
6::40::21::Then Sugriva, the Sun god's son, the Lord of Vanara chiefs, who had won fame of winning in battles, victorious exhausting Ravana in comb at flying the extensive sky reached Rama who was amid Vanara army.
6::40::22::Sugriva the son of the Sun god, having completed the feat, rejoiced by increasing the joy of foremost of Raghus. Then he who is adored by the monkey chiefs entered the army of Vanaras.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the fortieth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
