6::5::1::Nila settled the army successfully by making them reside on the northern shore of the sea, as per tradition. 
6::5::2::Dwivida and Mainda, the best of the vanaras, went about in all directions for safeguarding the army.
6::5::3::After the army had settled down on the shores of the lord of rivers (sea), Rama spoke to Lakshmana who stood beside him.
6::5::4::As time passes, grief passes away. However my sorrow is progressing day by day being unable to see my beloved.
6::5::5::﻿There is no grief in me that my beloved is at a distance, nor that she is taken away. Indeed her age is advancing. On this account I am feeling for her.
6::5::6::O Wind Touch that place where my beloved is and touch me as it will give me the same feeling as my beloved's touch. Through the moon I will get her eye contact too.
6::5::7::While being carried away that beloved of mine would have cried aloud saying 'oh my lord'. This thought is burning my body as though I have consumed poison in my stomach.
6::5::8::The pain of separation from her is working as fuel and the thought about hers is engulfing me as extensive flame and burning my body day and night.
6::5::9::O Saumitri Plunging into water alone I will lie down. Probably then the god of love will not be able to consume me while sleeping.
6::5::10::Me and Sita are seeking refuge on the same land indeed. Because of that only survival is possible for me, who is desiring for her very much.
6::5::11::I am living only because of hearing about her survival, just as a paddy field without water gets wet by the proximity of a neighboring paddy field with water.
6::5::12::When will I be able to win the enemies and see that Sita of charming limbs, with large and beautiful eyes like lotus petals, who is like an abundance of fortune?
6::5::13::I do not know when I will lift her lotuslike face slightly and drink her beautiful lips like an afflicted man drinks sweet juice.
6::5::14::﻿Indeed I am eager to embrace my chest with hers like the palmyra -fruit trees hold the fruits.When will it happen?
6::5::15::That darkeyed lady (Sita), even though she has me (husband), is in the midst of rakshasas. Surely she is sad and emaciated being away from her husband, without a protector.
6::5::16::My beloved is king Janaka's daughter and daughterinlaw of Dasaratha. Yet she is sleeping amid Rakshasas. How is it?
6::5::17::When will she come out pushing the Rakshasas like the crescent moon comes out pushing the dark clouds in autumn?
6::5::18::Sita who is by nature slim would surely be slender due to abstaining from eating, unfavorable time and location.
6::5::19::Indeed by shooting arrows into the chest of rakshasa king, when will I get back Sita and cast off grief from my mind.
6::5::20::When will Sita, the chaste woman, who is like the daughter of Gods, cling to my neck, and indeed shed tears of joy?
6::5::21::When will I get rid of this terrible grief of separation from Mythili for good, just like discarding a soiled garment?
6::5::22::While sagacious Rama was wailing in that way the day came to an end with the sun descending to the west. 
6::5::23::Remembering the lotus petal eyed Sita, Rama who was distracted with grief, comforted by Lakshmana offered evening prayers.।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्दकाण्डेपञ्चमस्सर्गः।।This is the end of the fifth Sarga of Yuddhakanda of the first epic, the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
