6::25::1::सबले along with army, दशरथात्मजे Dasaratha's son, रामे Rama, सागरम् ocean, तीर्णे crossing the shore, श्रीमान् exuberant, रावणः Ravana, अमात्यौ with ministers, शुकसारणौ to Suka and Saarana, अब्रवीत् spoke.
6::25::2::समग्रं all of them together, वानरम् Vanaras, बलम् army, दुस्तरम् arduous, सागरम् ocean, तीर्णम् crossed, रामेण by Rama, सागरे in the ocean अभूतपूर्वम् that which is not known before, सेतुबन्धनम् construction.
6::25::3::सागरे in the sea, तम् they, सेतुबन्धम् constructed bridge, कथञ्चन even, नश्रद्दधाम् not believable, तत् those, वानरंबलम् Vanara force, मया to me, अवश्यम् surely, सङ् ख्येयंच the size of their army.
6::25::4::भवन्तौ you both, अनुपलक्षितौ without their notice, वानरम् Vanara's, सैन्यम् army, प्रविश्य entering, परिमाणंच size of it, वीर्यंच heroes, ये of those, प्लवङ्गमाः of the monkeys, मुख्याः chief, रामस्य Rama's, सुग्रीवस्यच and Sugriva's, ये of those, मन्त्रिणः ministers, सङ्गताः groups, ये of those, पूर्वम् earlier, अभिवर्तन्ते those who are in forefront, ये of those, प्लवङ्गमाः monkeys, शूराः warriors, सलिलार्णने in the abode of waters, सागरे in the sea, सः that, सेतुः bridge, यधा centre, बद्धः built, महात्मनाम् great, तेषां of those वानराणाम् of the Vanaras, निवेशम् location, यथा in the same way, रामस्यव्यवसायंच Rama's efforts, वीर्यम् valour, प्रहरणानिच weapons also, वीरस्य of the heroes, लक्षयणस्यच and of Lakshmana's, तत्त्वतः truly, ज्ञातुम् wish to know, अर्हथः I ought.
6::25::5::महौजसाम् highly energetic ones, तेषाम् those, वानराणाम् among the Vanaras, सेनापतिः army chief, कः who, तच्च all these, यथातत्त्वम् their matters, ज्ञात्वाशीघ्रम् knowing quickly, अगन्तुम् you return, अर्हथः fit.
6::25::6::इति thus, प्रतिसमाधिष्टौ having accepted the order, वीरौ heroes, शुकसारणौ S uka and Saarana, राक्षसौ both Rakshasas, हरिरूपधरौ taking the form of Vanaras, वानरम् in to Vanaras, बलम् army, प्रविष्टौ entered.
6::25::7::ततः there upon, तौ both of them, शुकसारणौ Suka and Saarana, आचिन्त्यम् that which cannot be conceived, रोमहर्षणम् that which caused raising of hair (stunned), तत् that, वानरम् Vanara's, सैन्यम् army, सङ् ख्यातुम् to count the numbers, तदा that time, नाध्यगच्छेताम् whose number could not be known (not conceived).
6::25::8::पर्वताग्रेषु on mountain summits, निर्दरेषु in caverns, गुहासुच in caves, समुद्रस्य ocean's, तीरेषु shores, वनेषु in forests, उपवनेषुच and adjoining gardens, स्थितम् settled, तरमाणम् crossing, तीर्णंच shores, तर्तुकामंच some in the process of crossing, सर्वशः all over, निविष्टम् settled, निविश्चे staying, भीमनादम् terrific noise, महाबलम् great force, अक्षोभ्यम् that which is never ending, तद्बलार्णवम् that ocean of army, निशाचरौ the Rakshasas, ददृशाते witnessed.
6::25::9::महातेजाः brilliant one, विभीषणः Vibheeshana, प्रतिच्छन्नौ hidden, तौ those two, ददर्श saw, सः that, शुकसारणौ Suka and Saarana, गृहीत्वा took hold of, रामाय Rama's, आचचक्षे brought to the notice.
6::25::10::परपुरञ्जय conqueror of enemy 's citadels, तस्य its, राक्षसेन्द्रस्य Rakshasa king's, मन्त्रिणौ ministers, एतौ those two, शुकसारणौ Suka and Saarana, चारौ spies, लङ्कायाः from Lanka, समनुप्राप्तौ have come to find out.
6::25::11::तौ those two, रामम् at Rama, दृष्टवा to look, व्यथितौ worried, तथा so also, जीविते of life, निराशौ lost hope, भीतौ caught up with fear, कृताञ्जलिपुटौ lifted up their palms greeting, इदम् these, वचनम् words, ऊचतुः expressed.
6::25::12::सौम्य noble, राघवनन्दन delight of Raghu race, आवाम् come, रावणस्रहितौ assigned by Ravana, तव to you, इदम् thus, सर्वम् entire, बलम् army strength, परिज्ञातुम् to know about, इह here, आगतौ arrived.
6::25::13::दशरथात्मजः Dasaratha's son, सर्वभूतहिते the wellbeing of all beings, रतः remains devoted, रामः Rama, तयोः to both of them, तत् those, वचनम् words, श्रूत्वा on hearing, प्रहसन् smiling, वाक्यम् words, आब्रवीत् spoke.
6::25::14::सर्वम् entire, बलम् army, दृष्टंयदि looking at the, वयम् our, सुपरिक्षिताःवा observing well, यथोक्तम् that which is appropriate, कार्यम् action, कृतंना accomplishing, छन्दतः freely, प्रतिगम्यताम् you may return back.
6::25::15::अथा and now, किञ्चित् even a bit, अदृष्टंवा not seen, तत् that, भूयः you may do, द्रष्टुम् see, अर्हथः ought to see, ना or else, विभीषणः Vibheeshana कात्स्नर्येन in totality, भूयः you may, सन्दर्शयिष्यति will show you.
6::25::16::इदम् thus, ग्रहम् having been caught, प्राप्य by us, जीवितंप्रति in turn of your life, न not, वा or, भेतव्यम् apprehension, न्यस्तशस्त्रौ those who do not possess, गृहीतौ wield, दूतौ envoys, वदम् to slay अर्हतः ought to.
6::25::17::विभीषण Vibheeshana, सततं ever, शत्रुपक्षस्य enemy's side, विकर्षिणौ seeking to divide, प्रच्छमानौ are requesting, चारौ spies, उभौ both, रात्रिंचरौ night rangers, विमुञ्च free.
6::25::18::लङ्कांनगरीम् into the city of Lanka, प्रविश्य on entering, रक्षसाम् Rakshasas, राजा king, धनदानुजः younger brother of Kubera, भवद् भ्याम् to them, ममवचनम् my words, यथोक्तम् as it is told by me, वक्तव्यः you may tell.
6::25::19::यत् that which, बलम् strength, समाश्रित्य relying on which, मे my, सीताम् Sita, हृतावान् has been abducted अपिच and also, तत् that, ससैन्यः along with army, सहभान्दव and relations, यथाकाम् at his will, दर्शय you may display.
6::25::20::श्वः tomorrow, काल्ये at day dawn, मया of me, शरैः arrows, विध्वंसितम् will crush, रक्षसम् Rakshasas, बलम् strength, सप्राकाराम् in the same manner, सतोरणाम् the arches of the entrance, लङ्कांनगरीम् of Lanka city, पश्य you may see.
6::25::21::रावण Ravana, श्वः tomorrow, काल्ये at day dawn, वज्रवान् wielder of thunderbolt, वासवः Vasava, दानवेषु at Rakshasas, वज्रम् इव like the thunder bolt, ससैन्ये even the army also, त्वयि you. भीमम् dreadful, क्रोधम् anger, अहम् of mine, मोक्ष्यामि will release.
6::25::22::इति thus, प्रतिसमाधिष्टौ heard the words of reply, राक्षसौ both the Rakshasas, शुकसारणौ Suka and Saarana, धर्मवत्सलम् lover of dharma, एनम् in that manner, राघवम् Raghava, जयइतिप्रतिनन्द्य praising saying ' victory to you', लङ्कांनगरीम् to Lanka, आगम्य having reached, राक्षसाधिपम् king of Rakshasas, अब्रूताम् said like this.
6::25::23::क्षसेश्वर Lord of Rakshasas, वधार्थम् for the sake of slaying, विभीषणगृहीतौ held captive by Vibheeshana, धर्मात्मना righteous self, अमिततेजसा highly effulgent, रामेण by Rama, दृष्टवा seeing, मुक्तौ released.
6::25::24::लोकपालसमाः equal to rulers of the world, शूराः heroic ones, कृतास्त्राः wielders of weapons, दृढविक्रमाः of remarkable bra very, दाशरथिः son of Dasaratha, रामः Rama, श्रीमान् exuberant, लक्ष्मणः Lakshmana, विभीषणः Vibheeshana, महातेजाः highly brilliant one, महेन्द्रसमविक्रमः resembles Indra in valour, सुग्रीवश्च and Sugriva's, चत्वारः all the four, पुरुषर्षभाः bulls among men, यत्र there, एकस्थानगताः come together, एते these, सप्राकाराम् that manner, सतोरणाम् the archways, लङ्कांपुरीम् of Lanka, उत्पाट्य unearth, सङ्क्रमयितुम् , शक्ताः capable, सर्वे even if all, वानराः Vanaras, तिष्ठन्तु keep away.
6::25::25::रामस्य Rama's, तत् that, रूपम् form, यादृशम् to see, प्रहरणानिचएकः weapons, he alone, लङ्कांपुरीम् Lanka city, वधिष्यति will slay, तेत्रयः those three, तिष्ठन्तु even keep away.
6::25::26::रामलक्ष्मणगुप्ता even if Rama and Lakshmana are protected, सुग्रीवेणच and Sugriva also, सावाहिनी that ocean of army, सर्वैः entire, सुरासुरैःअपि even suras and asuras, दुर्दर्षतर formidable, बभूव seems.
6::25::27::सम्प्रति at this time, योद्धुम् war, इच्छताम् desiring, महात्मनाम् with great (Vanara) heroes, वनौकसाम् wanderers of woods, ध्वजिनी the army, प्रहृष्टरूपा are highly delighted, विरोधेन to wage war, अलम् not good, शम anger, विधीयताम् give up, मैथिली Mythili, दाशरथाय to Rama, प्रदीयताम् give away.
