6::10::1::Thereafter, determined to relate about righteous and material gains, Vibheeshana of fierce tasks got up early in the morning when the Sun rose and set himself to go to the residence of Lord of Rakshasas.
6::10::2::Like a lofty mountain top, and like a summit of a mountain, Ravana's palace was a supreme one, divided into many spacious sections and surrounded by many people.
6::10::3::The palace was inhabited by wise ones, and devoted to their Lord and ministers,commanded by trustworthy and competent Rakshasas spread everywhere and well protected.
6::10::4::It was filled with elephants in rut breathing heavily, which was like a tempestuous wind around, that echoed by the blowing of conchs of the early morning and filled with the sounds of drums and trumpets.
6::10::5::(It was) The royal path was filled with women, with prattling sounds of gossiping. It had shining golden passages and decorated with the best of ornaments.
6::10::6::(It was) like the abode of Gandharvas (the celestial musicians), like an abode of wind god, abounding in collection of precious gems, like the mansion of Nagas indulging  in enjoyment.
6::10::7::Heroic (Vibheeshana) of exceptional splendour, whose brilliance spread widely like the radiance of the highly lustrous Sun entered his brother's abode.
6::10::8::Highly effulgent (Vibheeshana) heard sounds of recitation of sacred mantras from Vedas uttered by learned ones desiring a propitious day for his brother.
6::10::9::Mighty Vibheeshana saw there, brahmins learned in vedas and mantras, who worshipped with yellow rice, curd, clarified butter and flowers.
6::10::10::Vibheeshana, of broad shoulders, who is revered by Rakshasas was shining in his own splendour. He greeted with folded palms, the brother of Kubera (Ravana) seated on his chair.
6::10::11::Vibheeshana who was learned in traditions and wellversed with code of conduct reached a seat decorated with gold blessed by the glance of the king Ravana.
6::10::12::When none other than ministers were present, Vibheeshana spoke these meaningful words to the distinguished Ravana, decidedly wishing for welfare.
6::10::13::Vibheeshana who knew the good and bad of the world and knew to advice in consonance with place and time said to his elder brother in an appeasing manner, propitiating him observing the customary tradition.
6::10::14::Since Vaidehi has come to this city, inauspicious happenings are seen by us.
6::10::15::Even from the fire of fire sacrifices, fire particles polluted with smoke are rising and the fire is not burning with brilliance.
6::10::16::In the cooking fire, in places of fire sacrifice, so also at places where offerings are made into fire, serpents are seen. Ants are seen in the Havis.
6::10::17::The udder of cows is dried up, the proud elephants have lost their ichor, the horses are pathetic and neighing. They are not even interested in fodder.
6::10::18::O King the donkeys and camels have shed their body hair and are crying. Even though they are treated for it in different ways they are not getting to be in normal natural form.
6::10::19::Wild crows are seen in flocks all over the top of aerial chariot sounding harsh gathered in groups.
6::10::20::Even the eagles are collecting together and standing over the houses of the capital repeatedly in both the auspicious times of morning and evening and making inauspicious sounds.
6::10::21::At the entrance of the capital are heard thunderous sounds of carnivorous animals collected together sounding like thunder.
6::10::22::Therefore, the task (of burning Lanka) has commenced. I have thought of this appropriate atonement. Restore Vaidehi to Rama.
6::10::23::O great king You may know that I am not telling like this out of my delusion or greed. You ought not to find fault with me.
6::10::24::All of us, the Rakshasas and Rakshasa women of the capital, even those in the harem, and all the common people are aware of this offence.
6::10::25::All your ministers have abstained from telling you out of fear of you. I must necessarily tell you (as brother) this which is seen and heard. You may determine that which is justifiable by determining the propriety. It is proper for me to submit to you.
6::10::26::Brother Vibheeshana thus tendered advice to Ravana, the eminent king of Rakshasas in the presence of his ministers.
6::10::27::Foregoing the beneficial, meaningful, and gentle words of counsel of significance in the past, present and future also (given by Vibheeshana), Ravana seized with anger replied in this manner.
6::10::28::I do not perceive fear from anyone. Rama will not be able to get Mythili at any time. How can the elder brother of Lakshmana withstand me even if Indra and Devatas come (to his help) in battle
6::10::29::Then mighty tenheaded Ravana of formidable valour, a destroyer of Devatas' army in war, sent away Vibheeshana who had spoken words of good advice in that manner.।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेवामलीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेदशमस्सर्गः।।This is the end of the tenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
