6::2::1::Glorious Sugriva spoke such words of advice to remove the agony of Rama,son of Dasaratha, who was filled with sorrow.
6::2::2::Heroic Rama Why are you grieving like a common man? Give up your grief just like an ungrateful one gives up friendship.
6::2::3::Raghava Having secured the information (of Sita) and known the location of the enemy's residence, I do not see the reason for your mourning.
6::2::4::Raghava You are an intellectual, well versed in Sastras, wise and learned. Give up this sinful thought just as the one who is efficient gives up the one who violates subtle truth. 
6::2::5::If we cross over that ocean infested with huge crocodiles and ascend the fortress of Lanka, know that the enemy is killed.
6::2::6::One who is despondent, dejected and overwhelmed with grief, will be dispirited in all matters. Not only that with worry he will meet with disaster.
6::2::7::All these vanara leaders and heroes are highly capable and for your happiness they are even ready to enter fire. I know this from their joy and I even infer that it is certain (to happen).
6::2::8::You ought to work such that we would kill that enemy Ravana of sinful deeds with our prowess and get back  Sita. I hope you are capable of doing that.
6::2::9::Raghava You think that we will be building a bridge and then seeing that city of the king of Rakshasas.
6::2::10::If the city of Lanka situated on top of Trikuta mountain is seen, you can be sure that Ravana is killed.
6::2::11::Without building a bridge on that dreadful ocean, the abode of Varuna, it is not possible for suras or asuras accompanied by Indra also to crush Lanka. 
6::2::12::On building a bridge over the large ocean up to Lanka, when all my army of vanaras can cross over, you may consider that you have won. These vanaras are heroic in war and can assume any form at will.
6::2::13::O king, therefore enough of this agitated feeling which destroys everything. In this world the valiance of man is lost if he is sorrowful. 
6::2::14::Just as heroism follows a human being in this world on accomplishing a task, you who are very wise, should resort to courage and valour and rise up.
6::2::15::If you who are great among the valiant ones worry for that which is destroyed or lost, it would lead to disaster of everything. 
6::2::16::You are highly intelligent, foremost among those who are wellversed in the meaning of all shastras. You will conquer your enemy along with friends like me.
6::2::17::O Raghava When you hold the bow in war, Indeed  who can stand in front of you in the three worlds. I have not seen.
6::2::18::The task of yours entrusted to vanaras will never be spoiled. Very soon you will see Sita crossing over the ocean that cannot be subdued.
6::2::19::O Lord of earth Enough of that pain you have experienced. Give up sorrow and take on to anger. When kshatriyas are lethargic, they become dull but all are scared at a fearful one.
6::2::20::You are endowed with subtle intellect and now think of the means to cross over this dreadful looking ocean the lord of rivers.
6::2::21::If the vanara army can cross (the ocean) you are certain that we will conquer. Presume that the army has succeeded.
6::2::22::Being heroic in combat, these vanaras can take any form at their will.They would rain boulders and trees on enemies and cut them to size.
6::2::23::O Exterminator of foes By whatever means the ocean is crossed by us, think that the enemy has been killed in combat.
6::2::24::Of what use is speaking many words. By all means you will be victorious. I see signs of it and feel highly delighted in my mind.।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेद्वितीयस्सर्गः।।This is the end of the second Sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic,the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
