6::46::1::Thereafter looking at the sky and the ground for Rama and Lakshmana, the Vanara leaders saw the two brothers, lying on the ground hurt by arrows.
6::46::2::Indrajith retired after completing the task, like a cloud that retires after raining. Then came Vibheeshana and Sugriva to that location.
6::46::3::Neela, Dwivida, Mainda, Sushena, Kumuda, Angada accompanied by Hanuman grieved intensely on looking at the Raghavas.
6::46::4::Unable to move, with feeble breath, drenched in blood and the body covered all over with arrows, lying on a bed of arrows, stunned, with reduced prowess, sighing like serpents, the heroes, Rama, and Lakshmana, who were like golden posts became dull. Rama and Lakshmana were lying on a heroic bed, arrows stuck to the bodies. Vibheeshana and all the Vanaras kept seeing both the scions and wept surrounding them.
6::46::5::Though the Vanaras searched all over the battlefield and in all directions of the sky, they could not see Indrajith of mystical powers.
6::46::6::Vibheeshana started looking with occult powers for his brother's son endowed with occult power following occult means and found Indrajith.
6::46::7::Brilliant and glorious Vibheeshana, capable of difficult deeds, incomparable at work, and in fight, unrivalled in battle, saw the hidden hero Indrajith by virtue of a boon (from Brahma).
6::46::8::Reviewing the scions lying on bed by his action, Indrajith caused extreme joy to all Rakshasas and spoke.
6::46::9::The two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, who slayed Dushana and Khara have been struck.
6::46::10::Even if all the sages, Devatas and Rakshasas collected together come, they cannot get liberated from this bondage of arrows.
6::46::11::On whose account my father was in grief and spent all night and passed the three parts of the night (without sleep) and why he was unable to sleep was not understood clearly. By his (Rama's) action this Lanka is agitated like a river during the rainy season. He, who is the root cause of this calamity, has been got rid of by me, thought Indrajith.
6::46::12::Rama, and Lakshmana and even all valiant Vanaras have been got rid of just like clouds of autumn are wasted.
6::46::13::Indrajith, having spoken in that way to all Rakshasas, began to strike all the Vanara leaders looking at him.
6::46::14::The slayer of enemies, Indrajith attacked Neela with nine shafts, so also Mainda and Dwivida with three separate sharpedged shafts.
6::46::15::Indrajith endowed with great bow pierced Jambavan in his chest, and released ten arrows at Hanuman, endowed with speed in war.
6::46::16::Indrajith endowed with speed in war, attacked highly energetic Gavaksha and Sarabha with two arrows each.
6::46::17::Thereafter Indrajith attacked the ruler of Golangulas, and Vali's son Angada with many arrows.
6::46::18::Mighty son of Ravana, then attacked the best of monkeys with arrows which were like flames of fire.
6::46::19::Indrajith hurt the Vanaras with hails of arrows terrifying them. Then the mighty armed son of Ravana laughed and spoke these words.
6::46::20::O Rakshasas! Look at these two brothers together bound by my fierce arrows in front of you.
6::46::21::Indrajith having spoken in that way to the Rakshasas, all of them were highly amazed by the action of Indrajith and went laughing.
6::46::22::The Rakshasas thundering like rain clouds, roaring aloud thinking 'Rama is killed' by Ravana's son offered prayers.
6::46::23::Thereafter having seen the two brothers Rama and Lakshmana not responding or breathing, lying on the ground, he thought they were dead.
6::46::24::Indrajith, who is victorious in battles, feeling happy and creating happiness to all Rakshasas collected there entered the city of Lanka.
6::46::25::Sugriva was overtaken by fear on seeing Rama and Lakshmana riddled with arrows from head to foot all over the body
6::46::26::O Vanara! We are helpless, be confident, for those following righteousness and truthfulness there is no fear of death.
6::46::27::Vibheeshana, having spoken in that manner, there after dipped his hand in water and wiped the beautiful eyes of Sugriva to brighten.
6::46::28::Thereafter the dutiful Vibheeshana taking water as per tradition consecrated chanting sacred text and wiped Sugriva's eyes.
6::46::29::Wise Vibheeshana having wiped Sugriva's face clean in accordance with time addressed with opportune words.
6::46::30::O king of monkeys! This is not the time for faint heartedness. Extreme attachment at this time will lead us to death.
6::46::31::Therefore, give up faintheartedness as all actions will be destroyed by that. Following Rama's leadership, think of the army's welfare.
6::46::32::Or else till they become conscious, protect the Kakuthsa princes. When they become conscious, they can get rid of our fear.
6::46::33::Therefore, Rama has no fear of death, even a little. Whatever splendour is lost, prosperity will not leave him.
6::46::34::Therefore, restoring breath let us reassure the army again till all actions are carried out by restoring their confidence.
6::46::35::O Monkey leader! these monkeys whose eyes have become big (are dilated) with fear are talking ear to ear (about Rama).
6::46::36::Let the army forces of monkeys be happy seeing me moving, getting rid of the inherent fear in them just as they discard a garland of flowers enjoyed by them earlier.
6::46::37::The king of Rakshasas, Vibheeshana having assured Sugriva, knowing the Vanara army he reassured them.
6::46::38::Great Indrajith surrounded by all army entered the city of Lanka and approached his father.
6::46::39::Having reached Ravana, Indrajith greeted him with folded palms and broke the pleasant news, Rama and Lakshmana are killed.
6::46::40::In the midst of Rakshasas, Ravana hearing the news of his enemies being killed, rejoiced, and got up from his couch and embraced his son.
6::46::41::Delighted Ravana kissed his son on the forehead and enquired of him of the details. Indrajith presented details saying that both Rama and Lakshmana were stunned in the network of arrows, and lost splendour.
6::46::42::Hearing the words of the great chariot warrior, Ravana was filled with excessive joy at heart. His fear and agony of Dasaratha's son having gone on hearing the words of his son, Ravana greeted him.।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषटचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः ।।This is the end of the forty sixth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.
